[Pageheading: EARLY REMINISCENCES]

In the year 1872 Queen Victoria wrote down with her own hand some
reminiscences of her early childhood, the manuscript of which is
preserved at Windsor, and which may be quoted here.

"My earliest recollections are connected with Kensington Palace,
where I can remember crawling on a yellow carpet spread out for that
purpose--and being told that if I cried and was naughty my 'Uncle
Sussex' would hear me and punish me, for which reason I always
screamed when I saw him! I had a great horror of _Bishops_ on account
of their wigs and _aprons_, but recollect this being partially
got over in the case of the then Bishop of Salisbury (Dr Fisher,
great-uncle to Mr Fisher, Private Secretary to the Prince of Wales),
by his kneeling down and letting me play with his badge of Chancellor
of the Order of the Garter. With another Bishop, however, the
persuasion of showing him my 'pretty shoes' was of no use. Claremont
remains as the brightest epoch of my otherwise rather melancholy
childhood--where to be under the roof of that beloved Uncle--to listen
to some music in the Hall when there were dinner-parties--and to go
and see dear old Louis!--the former faithful and devoted Dresser and
friend of Princess Charlotte--beloved and respected by all who knew
her--and who doted on the little Princess who was too much an idol in
the House. This dear old lady was visited by every one--and was the
only really devoted Attendant of the poor Princess, whose governesses
paid little real attention to her--and who never left her, and was
with her when she died. I used to ride a donkey given me by my Uncle,
the Duke of York, who was very kind to me. I remember him well--tall,
rather large, very kind but extremely shy. He always gave me beautiful
presents. The last time I saw him was at Mr Greenwood's house, where
D. Carlos lived at one time,--when he was already very ill,--and he
had Punch and Judy in the garden for me.


[Pageheading: EARLY REMINISCENCES]

"To Ramsgate we used to go frequently in the summer, and I remember
living at Townley House (near the town), and going there by steamer.
Mamma was very unwell. Dear Uncle Leopold went with us.

"To Tunbridge Wells we also went, living at a house called Mt.
Pleasant, now an Hotel. Many pleasant days were spent here, and the
return to Kensington in October or November was generally a day of
tears.

"I was brought up very simply--never had a room to myself till I was
nearly grown up--always slept in my Mother's room till I came to the
Throne. At Claremont, and in the small houses at the bathing-places,
I sat and took my lessons in my Governess's bedroom. I was not fond of
learning as a little child--and baffled every attempt to teach me my
letters up to 5 years old--when I consented to learn them by their
being written down before me.


[Pageheading: GEORGE IV.]

"I remember going to Carlton House, when George IV. lived there, as
quite a little child before a dinner the King gave. The Duchess of
Cambridge and my 2 cousins, George and Augusta, were there. My Aunt,
the Queen of Würtemberg (Princess Royal), came over, in the year '26,
I think, and I recollect perfectly well seeing her drive through the
Park in the King's carriage with red liveries and 4 horses, in a _Cap_
and evening dress,--my Aunt, her sister Princess Augusta, sitting
_opposite_ to her, also in evening attire, having dined early with the
Duke of Sussex at Kensington. She had adopted all the German fashions
and spoke broken English--and had not been in England for many
many years. She was very kind and good-humoured but very large and
unwieldy. She lived at St James's and had a number of Germans with
her. In the year '26 (I think) George IV. asked my Mother, my Sister
and me down to Windsor for the first time; he had been on bad terms
with my poor father when he died,--and took hardly any notice of the
poor widow and little fatherless girl, who were so poor at the time
of his (the Duke of Kent's) death, that they could not have travelled
back to Kensington Palace had it not been for the kind assistance of
my dear Uncle, Prince Leopold. We went to Cumberland Lodge, the King
living at the Royal Lodge. Aunt Gloucester was there at the same
time. When we arrived at the Royal Lodge the King took me by the hand,
saying: 'Give me your little paw.' He was large and gouty but with a
wonderful dignity and charm of manner. He wore the wig which was so
much worn in those days. Then he said he would give me something for
me to wear, and that was his picture set in diamonds, which was worn
by the Princesses as an order to a blue ribbon on the left shoulder. I
was very proud of this,--and Lady Conyngham pinned it on my shoulder.
Her husband, the late Marquis of Conyngham, was the Lord
Chamberlain and constantly there, as well as Lord Mt. Charles (as
Vice-Chamberlain), the _present_ Lord Conyngham.

"None of the Royal Family or general visitors lived at the Royal
Lodge, but only the Conyngham family; all the rest at Cumberland
Lodge. Lady Maria Conyngham (now dead, first wife to Lord Athlumney,
daughter of Lord Conyngham), then quite young, and Lord Graves
(brother-in-law to Lord Anglesey and who afterwards shot himself on
account of his wife's conduct, who was a Lady of the Bedchamber), were
desired to take me a drive to amuse me. I went with them, and Baroness
(then Miss) Lehzen (my governess) in a pony carriage and 4, with 4
grey ponies (like my own), and was driven about the Park and taken to
Sandpit Gate where the King had a Menagerie--with wapitis, gazelles,
chamois, etc., etc. Then we went (I think the next day) to Virginia
Water, and met the King in his phaeton in which he was driving the
Duchess of Gloucester,--and he said 'Pop her in,' and I was lifted
in and placed between him and Aunt Gloucester, who held me round
the waist. (Mamma was much frightened.) I was greatly pleased, and
remember that I looked with great respect at the scarlet liveries,
etc. (the Royal Family had crimson and green liveries and only the
King scarlet and blue in those days). We drove round the nicest part
of Virginia Water and stopped at the Fishing Temple. Here there was
a large barge and every one went on board and fished, while a band
played in another! There were numbers of great people there, amongst
whom was the last Duke of Dorset, then Master of the Horse. The King
paid great attention to my Sister,[2] and some people fancied he
might marry her!! She was very lovely then--about 18--and had charming
manners, about which the King was extremely particular. I afterwards
went with Baroness Lehzen and Lady Maria C. to the Page Whiting's
cottage. Whiting had been at one time in my father's service. He lived
where Mr Walsh now does (and where he died years ago), in the small
cottage close by; and here I had some _fruit_ and amused myself by
cramming one of Whiting's children, a little girl, with peaches. I
came after dinner to hear the band play in the Conservatory, which
is still standing, and which was lit up by coloured lamps--the King,
Royal Family, etc., sitting in a corner of the large saloon, which
still stands.

    [Footnote 2: The Princess Feodore of Leiningen, afterwards
    Princess of Hohenlohe, Queen Victoria's half-sister.]

"On the second visit (I _think_) the following year, also in summer,
there was a great encampment of tents (the same which were used at
the Camp at Chobham in '53, and some single ones at the Breakfasts at
Buckingham Palace in '68-9), and which were quite like a house, made
into different compartments. It rained dreadfully on this occasion,
I well remember. The King and party dined there, Prince and Princess
Lieven, the Russian Ambassador and Ambassadress were there.

"I also remember going to see Aunt Augusta at Frogmore, where she
lived always in the summer.

"We lived in a very simple, plain manner; breakfast was at half-past
eight, luncheon at half-past one, dinner at seven--to which I came
generally (when it was no regular large dinner party)--eating my bread
and milk out of a small silver basin. Tea was only allowed as a great
treat in later years.


[Pageheading: DUCHESS OF SAXE-COBURG-SAALFELD]

"In 1826 (I think) my dear Grandmother, the Dowager Duchess of
Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, came to Claremont, in the summer. Mamma and my
sister went on part of the way to meet her, and Uncle Leopold I think
had been to fetch her as far as Dover. I recollect the excitement and
anxiety I was in, at this event,--going down the great flight of steps
to meet her when she got out of the carriage, and hearing her say,
when she sat down in her room, and fixed her fine clear blue eyes on
her little grand-daughter whom she called in her letters 'the flower
of May,' 'Ein schönes Kind'--'a fine child.' She was very clever and
adored by her children but especially by her sons. She was a good deal
bent and walked with a stick, and frequently with her hands on her
back. She took long drives in an open carriage and I was frequently
sent out with her, which I am sorry to confess I did not like, as,
like most children of that age, I preferred running about. She was
excessively kind to children, but could not bear naughty ones--and I
shall never forget her coming into the room when I had been crying and
naughty at my lessons--from the next room but one, where she had
been with Mamma--and scolding me severely, which had a very salutary
effect. She dined early in the afternoon and Uncle Leopold asked many
of the neighbours and others to dinner to meet her. My brother Prince
Leiningen came over with her, and was at that time paying his court
to one of her ladies, Countess Klebelsberg, whom he afterwards
married--against the wish of his grandmother and mother--but which was
afterwards quite made up. In November (I think, or it may have been
at the end of October) she left, taking my sister with her back to
Coburg. I was very ill at that time, of dysentery, which illness
increased to an alarming degree; many children died of it in the
village of Esher. The Doctor lost his head, having lost his own child
from it, and almost every doctor in London was away. Mr Blagden came
down and showed much energy on the occasion. I recovered, and remember
well being very cross and screaming dreadfully at having to wear, for
a time, flannel next my skin. Up to my 5th year I had been very much
indulged by every one, and set pretty well _all_ at defiance. Old
Baroness de Späth, the devoted Lady of my Mother, my Nurse Mrs Brock,
dear old Mrs Louis--_all_ worshipped the poor little fatherless child
whose future then was still very uncertain; my Uncle the Duke of
Clarence's poor little child being alive, and the Duchess of Clarence
had one or two others later. At 5 years old, Miss Lehzen was placed
about me, and though she was most kind, she was very firm and I had
a proper respect for her. I was naturally very passionate, but always
most contrite afterwards. I was taught from the first to beg my maid's
pardon for any naughtiness or rudeness towards her; a feeling I have
ever retained, and think every one should _own_ their fault in a kind
way to any one, be he or she the lowest--if one has been rude to or
injured them by word or deed, especially those below you. People will
readily forget an insult or an injury when others _own_ their fault,
and express sorrow or regret at what they have done."


[Pageheading: THE EDUCATION OF THE PRINCESS]

In 1830 the Duchess of Kent wished to be satisfied that the system of
education then being pursued with the Princess was based on the right
lines, and that due moral and intellectual progress was being made.
A memorandum, carefully preserved among the archives, gives an
interesting account of the steps which she took to this end.


[Pageheading: LETTER TO THE BISHOPS]

[Pageheading: RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION]

The Duchess therefore brought the matter under the consideration
of those whom, from their eminent piety, great learning, and high
station, she considered best calculated to afford her valuable advice
upon so important a subject. She stated to the Bishops of London
and Lincoln[3] the particular course which had been followed in the
Princess's education, and requested their Lordships to test the
result by personal examination. The nature and objects of Her Royal
Highness's appeal to these eminent prelates will be best shown by the
following extracts from her letter to the Bishops:--

  "'The Princess will be eleven years of age in May; by the
  death of her revered father when she was but eight months old,
  her sole care and charge devolved to me. Stranger as I then
  was, I became deeply impressed with the absolute necessity of
  bringing her up entirely in this country, that every feeling
  should be that of Her native land, and proving thereby my
  devotion to duty by rejecting all those feelings of home and
  kindred that divided my heart.

  "'When the Princess approached her fifth year I considered it
  the proper time to begin in a moderate way her education--an
  education that was to fit Her to be either the Sovereign of
  these realms, or to fill a junior station in the Royal Family,
  until the Will of Providence should shew at a later period
  what Her destiny was to be.

  "'A revision of the papers I send you herewith will best shew
  your Lordships the system pursued, the progress made, etc. I
  attend almost always myself every lesson, or a part; and as
  the Lady about the Princess is a competent person, she assists
  Her in preparing Her lessons for the various masters, as
  I resolved to act in that manner so as to be Her Governess
  myself. I naturally hope that I have pursued that course most
  beneficial to all the great interests at stake. At the present
  moment no concern can be more momentous, or in which the
  consequences, the interests of the Country, can be more at
  stake, than the education of its future Sovereign.

  "'I feel the time to be now come that what has been done
  should be put to some test, that if anything has been done in
  error of judgment it may be corrected, and that the plan for
  the future should be open to consideration and revision. I do
  not presume to have an over-confidence in what I have done; on
  the contrary, as a female, as a stranger (but only in birth,
  as I feel that this is my country by the duties I fulfil, and
  the support I receive), I naturally desire to have a candid
  opinion from authorities competent to give one. In that view I
  address your Lordships; I would propose to you that you advert
  to all I have stated, to the papers I lay before you, and that
  then you should personally examine the Princess with a view of
  telling me--

    "'1. If the course hitherto pursued in Her education has
        been the best; if not, where it was erroneous.

    "'2. If the Princess has made all the Progress she should
       have made.

    "'3. And if the course I am to follow is that you would
       recommend, and if not in what respect you would
       desire a change, and on what grounds.

  "'Mr Davys[4] will explain to you the nature of the Princess's
  religious education, which I have confided to him, that
  she should be brought up in the Church of England as by
  Law established. When she was at a proper age she commenced
  attending Divine Service regularly with me, and I have every
  feeling, that she has religion at Her heart, that she is
  morally impressed with it to that degree, that she is less
  liable to error by its application to Her feelings as a Child
  capable of reflection. The general bent of Her character
  is strength of intellect, capable of receiving with ease,
  information, and with a peculiar readiness in coming to a very
  just and benignant decision on any point Her opinion is asked
  on. Her adherence to truth is of so marked a character that I
  feel no apprehension of that Bulwark being broken down by any
  circumstance.

  "'I must conclude by observing that as yet the Princess is not
  aware of the station that she is likely to fill. She is aware
  of its duties, and that a Sovereign should live for others;
  so that when Her innocent mind receives the impression of Her
  future fate, she receives it with a mind formed to be sensible
  of what is to be expected from Her, and it is to be hoped, she
  will be too well grounded in Her principles to be dazzled with
  the station she is to look to.'"

    [Footnote 3: Charles James Blomfield, Bishop of London,
    1828-1853, and John Kaye, Bishop of Lincoln, 1827-1853.]

    [Footnote 4: The Rev. George Davys, the Princess's instructor,
    afterwards successively Dean of Chester and Bishop of
    Peterborough.]


The examination was undertaken by the Bishops, with highly
satisfactory results. Their report says:

  "The result of the examination has been such as in our opinion
  amply to justify the plan of instruction which has been
  adopted. In answering a great variety of questions proposed to
  her, the Princess displayed an accurate knowledge of the most
  important features of Scripture History, and of the leading
  truths and precepts of the Christian Religion as taught by
  the Church of England, as well as an acquaintance with the
  Chronology and principal facts of English History remarkable
  in so young a person. To questions in Geography, the use of
  the Globes, Arithmetic, and Latin Grammar, the answers which
  the Princess returned were equally satisfactory.

  "Upon the whole, we feel no hesitation in stating our opinion
  that the Princess should continue, for some time to come, to
  pursue her studies upon the same plan which has been hitherto
  followed, and under the same superintendence. Nor do we
  apprehend that any other alterations in the plan will be
  required than those which will be gradually made by the
  judicious director of Her Highness's studies, as the mind
  expands, and her faculties are strengthened."


[Pageheading: RESULT OF EXAMINATION]

The Duchess of Kent referred all this correspondence to the Archbishop
of Canterbury.[5] His memorandum is preserved; it states he has
considered the Report, and further, has himself personally examined
the Princess. He continues:

  "I feel it my duty to say that in my judgment the plan of Her
  Highness's studies, as detailed in the papers transmitted to me by
  command of your Royal Highness, is very judicious, and particularly
  suitable to Her Highness's exalted station; and that from the
  proficiency exhibited by the Princess in the examination at which
  I was present, and the general correctness and pertinency of her
  answers, I am perfectly satisfied that Her Highness's education
  in regard to cultivation of intellect, improvement of talent, and
  religious and moral principle, is conducted with so much care and
  success as to render any alteration of the system undesirable."

    [Footnote 5: Dr William Howley.]

The Princess was gradually and watchfully introduced to public life,
and was never allowed to lose sight of the fact that her exalted
position carried with it definite and obvious duties. The following
speech, delivered at Plymouth in 1832, in answer to a complimentary
deputation, may stand as an instance of the view which the Duchess of
Kent took of her own and her daughter's responsibilities:--

  "It is very agreeable to the Princess and myself to hear the
  sentiments you convey to us. It is also gratifying to us to be assured
  that we owe all these kind feelings to the attachment you bear the
  King, as well as to his Predecessors of the House of Brunswick, from
  recollections of their paternal sway. The object of my life is
  to render the Princess worthy of the affectionate solicitude she
  inspires, and if it be the Will of Providence she should fill a higher
  station (I trust most fervently at a very distant day), I shall
  be fully repaid for my anxious care, if she is found competent to
  discharge the sacred trust; for communicating as the Princess does
  with all classes of Society, she cannot but perceive that the greater
  the diffusion of Religion, Knowledge, and the love of freedom in a
  country, the more orderly, industrious, and wealthy is its population,
  and that with the desire to preserve the constitutional Prerogatives
  of the Crown ought to be co-ordinate the protection of the liberties
  of the people."


[Pageheading: CLAREMONT]

The strictness of the _régime_ under which the Princess was brought
up is remarkable; and it is possible that her later zest for simple
social pleasures is partly to be accounted for by the austere routine
of her early days. In an interesting letter of 1843 to the Queen,
recalling the days of their childhood, Princess Feodore, the Queen's
half-sister, wrote--

"Many, many thanks, dearest Victoria, for your kind letter of the
7th from dear Claremont. Oh I understand how you like being there.
Claremont is a dear quiet place; to me also the recollection of the
few pleasant days I spent during my youth. I always left Claremont
with tears for Kensington Palace. When I look back upon those years,
which ought to have been the happiest in my life, from fourteen
to twenty, I cannot help pitying myself. Not to have enjoyed the
pleasures of youth is nothing, but to have been deprived of all
intercourse, and not one cheerful thought in that dismal existence of
ours, was very hard. My only happy time was going or driving out with
you and Lehzen; then I could speak and look as I liked. I escaped
some years of imprisonment, which you, my poor darling sister, had
to endure after I was married. But God Almighty has changed both
our destinies most mercifully, and has made us _so_ happy in our
homes--which is the only real happiness in this life; and those years
of trial were, I am sure, very useful to us both, though certainly not
pleasant. Thank God they are over!... I was much amused in your last
letter at your tracing the _quickness_ of our tempers in the female
line up to Grandmamma,[6] but I must own that you are _quite right_!"

    [Footnote 6: Augusta Caroline Sophia, Dowager-Duchess
    of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, a Princess of Reuss Ebersdorf
    (1757-1831).]

But if there was little amusement, there was, on the other hand, great
devotion; the Princess, as a child, had that peculiar combination
of self-will and warm-heartedness which is apt to win for a child a
special love from its elders. The Princess Feodore wrote to the Queen,
in 1843--

"... Späth[7] wished _me_ to thank you for the coronation print, as
she could not write to you or Albert _now_, she says! why, I don't
see. There certainly never was such devotedness as hers, to all our
family, although it sometimes shows itself rather foolishly--with you
it always was a sort of idolatry, when she used to go upon her knees
before you, when you were a child. She and poor old Louis did all
they could to spoil you, if Lehzen had not prevented and scolded them
nicely sometimes; it was quite amusing."

    [Footnote 7: Baroness Späth, Lady-in-Waiting to the Duchess of
    Kent.]


[Pageheading: WILLIAM IV.]

The Princess was brought up with exemplary simplicity at Kensington
Palace, where her mother had a set of apartments. She was often at
Claremont, which belonged to her uncle Leopold, King of the Belgians;
holidays were spent at Ramsgate, Tunbridge Wells, Broadstairs, and
elsewhere.

In June 1830 George IV. died, and William IV. succeeded to the Throne.
He had no legitimate offspring living; and it consequently became
practically certain that if the Princess outlived her uncle she would
succeed him on the Throne. The Duchess of Kent's Parliamentary Grant
was increased, and she took advantage of her improved resources to
familiarise the Princess with the social life of the nation. They paid
visits to historic houses and important towns, and received addresses.
This was a wise and prudent course, but the King spoke with ill-humour
of his niece's "royal progresses." The chief cause of offence was that
the Princess was not allowed by the Duchess of Kent to make her public
appearances under his own auspices, as he not unnaturally desired.
He also began to suspect that the Princess was deliberately kept
away from Court; a painful controversy arose, and the Duchess
became gradually estranged from her brother-in-law, in spite of the
affectionate attempts of Queen Adelaide to smooth matters over. His
resentment culminated in a painful scene, in 1836, when the King, at
a State banquet at Windsor, made a speech of a preposterous character;
speaking of the Duchess, who sat next him, as "that person," hinting
that she was surrounded with evil advisers, and adding that he should
insist on the Princess being more at Court. The Princess burst into
tears; the Duchess sate in silence: when the banquet was over, the
Duchess ordered her carriage, and was with difficulty prevailed upon
to remain at Windsor for the night. The King went so far in May 1837
as to offer the Princess an independent income, and the acceptance of
this by the Princess caused the Duchess considerable vexation; but the
project dropped. The King died in the following month, soon after the
Princess had attained her legal majority; he had always hoped that the
Duchess would not be Regent, and his wish was thus fulfilled.

It is no exaggeration to say that the accession of the Princess
Victoria reinstated the English monarchy in the affections of the
people. George IV. had made the Throne unpopular; William IV. had
restored its popularity, but not its dignity. Both of these kings were
men of decided ability, but of unbalanced temperament. In politics
both kings had followed a somewhat similar course. George IV. had
begun life as a strong Whig, and had been a close friend of Fox. Later
in life his political position resolved itself into a strong dislike
of Roman Catholic Relief. William IV. had begun his reign favourably
inclined to Parliamentary Reform; but though gratified by the personal
popularity which his attitude brought him in the country, he became
alarmed at the national temper displayed. It illustrates the tension
of the King's mind on the subject that, when he was told that if the
Reform Bill did not pass it would bring about a rebellion, he replied
that if it did bring about a rebellion he did not care: he should
defend London and raise the Royal Standard at Weedon (where there
was a military depôt); and that the Duchess of Kent and the Princess
Victoria might come in if they could.


[Pageheading: CHARACTER AND TEMPERAMENT]

[Pageheading: SYMPATHY WITH MIDDLE CLASSES]

The reign of William IV. had witnessed the zenith of Whig efficiency.
It had seen the establishment of Parliamentary and Municipal Reform,
the Abolition of Slavery, the new Poor Law, and other important
measures. But, towards the end of the reign, the Whig party began
steadily to lose ground, and the Tories to consolidate themselves.
Lord Melbourne had succeeded Lord Grey at the head of the Whigs, and
the difference of administration was becoming every month more and
more apparent. The King indeed went so far as abruptly to dismiss his
Ministers, but Parliament was too strong for him. Lord Melbourne's
principles were fully as liberal as Lord Grey's, but he lacked
practical initiative, with the result that the Whigs gradually
forfeited popular estimation and became discredited. The new reign,
however, brought them a decided increase of strength. The Princess had
been brought up with strong Whig leanings, and, as is clear from
her letters, with an equally strong mistrust of Tory principles and
politicians.

A word may here be given to the Princess's own character and
temperament. She was high-spirited and wilful, but devotedly
affectionate, and almost typically feminine. She had a strong sense
of duty and dignity, and strong personal prejudices. Confident, in a
sense, as she was, she had the feminine instinct strongly developed of
dependence upon some manly adviser. She was full of high spirits, and
enjoyed excitement and life to the full. She liked the stir of London,
was fond of dancing, of concerts, plays, and operas, and devoted to
open-air exercise. Another important trait in her character must be
noted. She had strong monarchical views and dynastic sympathies,
but she had no aristocratic preferences; at the same time she had no
democratic principles, but believed firmly in the due subordination
of classes. The result of the parliamentary and municipal reforms of
William IV.'s reign had been to give the middle classes a share in
the government of the country, and it was supremely fortunate that the
Queen, by a providential gift of temperament, thoroughly understood
the middle-class point of view. The two qualities that are most
characteristic of British middle-class life are common sense and
family affection; and on these particular virtues the Queen's
character was based; so that by a happy intuition she was able to
interpret and express the spirit and temper of that class which,
throughout her reign, was destined to hold the balance of political
power in its hands. Behind lay a deep sense of religion, the religion
which centres in the belief in the Fatherhood of God, and is impatient
of dogmatic distinctions and subtleties.




CHAPTER III

QUEEN VICTORIA'S RELATIONS AND FRIENDS


It may be held to have been one of the chief blessings of Queen
Victoria's girlhood that she was brought closely under the influence
of an enlightened and large-minded Prince, Leopold, her maternal
uncle, afterwards King of the Belgians. He was born in 1790, being the
youngest son of Francis, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and his youth
was spent in the Russian military service. He had shown talent and
courage in the field, and had commanded a battalion at Lützen and
Leipsic. He had married, in 1816, the Princess Charlotte, only child
of George IV. For many years his home was at Claremont, where the
Princess Charlotte had died; there the Princess Victoria spent many
happy holidays, and grew to regard her uncle with the most devoted
affection, almost, indeed, in the light of a father. It is said that
Prince Leopold had hoped to be named Regent, if a Regency should be
necessary.[1] He was offered, and accepted, the throne of Greece in
1830, but shrank from the difficulties of the position, and withdrew
his acceptance upon the plea that Lord Aberdeen, who was then Foreign
Secretary, was not prepared to make such financial arrangements as he
considered satisfactory.[2]

    [Footnote 1: A practical proof of his interest in his niece
    may be found in the fact that for years he contributed
    between three and four thousand a year to the expenses of her
    education, and for necessary holidays by the sea, at a time
    when the Duchess of Kent's Parliamentary Grant was unequal to
    the increasing expenses of her household.]

    [Footnote 2: Greece after having obtained autonomy was in a
    practically bankrupt condition, and the Powers had guaranteed
    the financial credit of the country until it was able to
    develop its own resources.]

It is interesting to observe from the correspondence that King Leopold
seems for many years to have continued to regret his decision; it was
not that he did not devote himself, heart and soul, to the country of
his adoption, but there seems to have been a romantic element in his
composition, which did not find its full satisfaction in presiding
over the destinies of a peaceful commercial nation.


[Pageheading: THE KING OF THE BELGIANS]

In 1831, when Louis Philippe, under pressure from Lord Palmerston,
declined the throne of Belgium for his son the Duc de Nemours, Prince
Leopold received and accepted an offer of the Crown. A Dutch invasion
followed, and the new King showed great courage and gallantry in an
engagement near Louvain, in which his army was hopelessly outnumbered.
But, though a sensitive man, the King's high courage and hopefulness
never deserted him. He ruled his country with diligence, ability, and
wisdom, and devoted himself to encouraging manufactures and commerce.
The result of his firm and liberal rule was manifested in 1848, when,
on his offering to resign the Crown if it was thought to be for
the best interests of the country, he was entreated, with universal
acclamation, to retain the sovereignty. Belgium passed through the
troubled years of revolution in comparative tranquillity. King Leopold
was a model ruler; his deportment was grave and serious; he was
conspicuous for honesty and integrity; he was laborious and upright,
and at the same time conciliatory and tactful.

He kept up a close correspondence with Queen Victoria, and paid her
several visits in England, where he was on intimate terms with
many leading Englishmen. It would be difficult to over-estimate the
importance of his close relations with the Queen; by example and
precept he inspired her with a high sense of duty, and from the first
instilled into her mind the necessity of acquainting herself closely
with the details of political administration. His wisdom, good sense,
and tenderness, as well as the close tie of blood that existed between
him and the Queen, placed him in a unique position with regard to her,
and it is plain that he was fully aware of the high responsibility
thus imposed upon him, which he accepted with a noble generosity. It
is true that there were occasions when, as the correspondence reveals,
the Queen was disposed to think that King Leopold endeavoured to
exercise too minute a control over her in matters of detail, and even
to attempt to modify the foreign policy of England rather for the
benefit of Belgium than in the best interests of Great Britain; but
the Queen was equal to these emergencies; she expressed her dissent
from the King's suggestions in considerate and affectionate terms,
with her gratitude for his advice, but made no pretence of following
it.

For her aunt, Queen Adelaide, the Princess Victoria had always felt
a strong affection; and though it can hardly be said that this gentle
and benevolent lady exercised any great influence over her more
vigorous and impetuous niece, yet the letters will testify to the
closeness of the tie which united them.


[Pageheading: QUEEN ADELAIDE]

Queen Adelaide was the eldest child of George, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen;
her mother was a princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg.

At the age of twenty-six she was married to the Duke of Clarence, then
in his fifty-third year, without any preliminary courtship. They
lived for a year in Hanover, and then principally at Bushey Park. Two
daughters were born to them, the elder of whom lived only a few hours;
the younger, Princess Elizabeth, died in the first year of her age.
Their married life was a happy one, in spite of the disparity of
age. Queen Adelaide was a woman of a deeply affectionate disposition,
sensible, sympathetic, and religious. She had a very definite ideal of
the duties of a wife and a Queen; she made it her pleasure to meet and
anticipate, as far as possible, her husband's wishes; and her husband,
hasty and choleric though he was, repaid her with tender affection. To
such an extent did the Queen merge her views in those of her husband,
that she passed at one time through a period of general unpopularity.
It was believed that she was adverse to Reform, and used her influence
against it. She was mobbed in the streets at the time when the Reform
agitation was at its height; and it is said that when the Melbourne
Ministry of 1834 was dismissed, London was (owing to an unjustifiable
communication of Lord Brougham to the _Times_) placarded with posters
bearing the words, "The Queen has done it all!"

It is a pathetic instance of the irony of fate that Queen Adelaide
should have thus been supposed to desire to take an active part in
politics. It is obvious, from her letters, that she had practically
no political views at all, except a gentle distrust of all proposed
changes, social or political. Her one idea of her position as Queen
was to agree with any expression of opinion that fell from the King.
She was fond of music, and took a deep interest in her religious
duties and in all that concerned the welfare of the Protestant
communion. But apart from this, her interests were entirely domestic
and personal, and her letters reveal her character in the most
amiable light. Her devotion to the King, and the tender and respectful
diffidence with which she welcomed her niece to the Throne, show a
very sweet nature.

The rest of her life, after King William's death, was passed to a
great extent under invalid conditions, though she was only forty-four
at the time of her niece's accession. She travelled a good deal in
search of health, and lived a quiet life in England, surrounded by
a small but devoted circle of friends and relations. Her personal
popularity with the nation became very great, not only for the simple
kindliness of her life, but for her splendid munificence; it is said
that her public subscriptions often exceeded £20,000 a year. She died
in December 1849. Queen Victoria was very much attached to her gentle,
simple-minded, and tender-hearted aunt, and treated her with the
utmost consideration and an almost daughterly affection.


[Pageheading: BARONESS LEHZEN]

Another person who had a large share in forming the Queen's character
was Louise Lehzen, the daughter of a Hanoverian clergyman, who came
to England as governess to Princess Feodore of Leiningen, Queen
Victoria's half-sister, shortly before the Queen's birth. In 1824
she became governess to the Princess Victoria. In 1827 George IV.
conferred upon her the rank of a Hanoverian Baroness. When the Duchess
of Northumberland, in 1830, was appointed the Princess's official
governess, she remained as lady in attendance. The Princess was
devoted to her, but "greatly in awe of her." She remained at Court
after the accession till 1842, without holding an official position,
and then returned to Germany, where she died in 1870.


[Pageheading: BARON STOCKMAR]

Baron Stockmar was another of the interesting personalities who came
into very close contact with the Queen in her early years. He was
forty-nine at the time of the accession, but he had come to England
more than twenty years before as private physician to Prince Leopold.
He endeared himself to the Princess Charlotte, who died holding his
hand. He afterwards became Prince Leopold's private secretary, and
took a prominent part as the Prince's representative in the successive
negotiations with regard to his candidature for the thrones of Greece
and Belgium. Upon the accession of Queen Victoria, Stockmar joined
the Court in a private capacity, and for fifteen months he held an
unofficial position as her chief adviser. There was a general feeling
of dislike in the minds of the English public to the German influences
that were supposed to be brought to bear on the Queen; and Lord
Melbourne found it necessary to make a public and categorical denial
of the statement that Stockmar was acting as the Queen's private
secretary. But the statement, if not technically, was virtually
true. Stockmar lived at Court, had interviews with the Queen and her
Ministers, and though he industriously endeavoured to efface himself,
yet there is no doubt that he was consulted on most important
questions. In 1838, he had been entrusted by King Leopold, with the
Queen's knowledge and consent, with a mission of great delicacy: he
was asked to accompany Prince Albert on a tour in Italy, with the idea
of completing his education, and in order to satisfy himself that
the Prince would be a worthy Consort for the Queen. This task he
discharged admirably, and became the most confidential and trusted of
all the Prince's friends. There are many letters of Stockmar's to the
Prince extant, which prove that Stockmar never shrank from speaking
the plainest truth to the Prince on matters of duty and faults of
temperament, without any courtier-like attempt to blink criticism
that might have been unpalatable. The Prince had the generosity and
humility to value this trait of Stockmar's very highly, to such an
extent that Stockmar's influence possessed if anything too great a
preponderance. Stockmar had jealously nursed two profound political
ideals--the unity of Germany under Prussia, and the establishment of
close relations between Germany and England. He induced Prince Albert,
heavily burdened as he was with work, to devote almost too much time
and thought to the former of these aims. Stockmar was a profound
student of social and constitutional questions. He had made a close
study of English political institutions; but though he grasped the
constitutional theory of the English Throne, and saw that the first
necessity for the Sovereign was to hold a position independent of
party, he never clearly understood that the Monarch should keep as
far as possible clear of political details. Stockmar's view of the
position was that the Sovereign should be practically Premier as well;
and much of the jealousy that was felt, on various occasions, at
the position which Prince Albert assumed with regard to political
situations, is referable to Stockmar's influence.

He was a very able man, with immense political knowledge, and without
personal ambition; Lord Palmerston, who was no friend to Stockmar's
theory of government, admitted that he was the most disinterested man
he had ever encountered. Stockmar's ambition was to achieve his
own political ideals, and to modify the course of events in what he
conceived to be beneficial directions; he was entirely indifferent
to the trappings of power, and this very disinterestedness made his
influence more supreme.

He suffered all his life from feeble health and a hypochondriacal
tendency, and was genuinely fond of retirement and quiet life. He
certainly deserved the devoted confidence reposed in him by Prince
Albert and the Queen; it may perhaps be questioned whether his own
_doctrinaire_ bias did not make itself too strongly felt, in the
minuteness with which Prince Albert dealt with English politics; but
the net result of his influence was that the danger, which lies in
wait for strictly constitutional Sovereigns, was averted--the danger,
that is, of leaving the administration of State affairs in the hands
of specialists, and depriving it of the wise control and independent
criticism which only the Crown can adequately supply.




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER IV


Queen Victoria, from the very first, took great pleasure in filing
the correspondence addressed to her. There are many volumes of letters
received from her various relations. We have thought it best to give
some of Queen Adelaide's early letters; they indicate in a remarkable
manner the growing estrangement between King William IV. and the
Duchess of Kent. In the earlier letters the King enquires very
affectionately after the Duchess, and constant mention is made of
presents sent to her; but the references made to her become less
frequent and colder, till at last the King contents himself with
sending messages only to the Princess. But the letters of Queen
Adelaide are always written in a strain of touching devotion and
affection, and reveal her as a woman of large heart and great
simplicity of character.


[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD]

But the most interesting series of letters are the Queen's own
correspondence with King Leopold, of which several hundred are
preserved. The letters, too, received by her from the King of the
Belgians are preserved in their entirety.

The letters which the Queen wrote to King Leopold are of extraordinary
interest; she kept up an unbroken correspondence with him, and spoke
freely of all that was in her mind. Two points are worthy of special
mention: though she was early convinced of the necessity of holding an
independent constitutional position in politics she mentions the Tory
party with undisguised mistrust; and further, the name of King William
hardly ever occurs until his last illness.

King Leopold's early letters reveal his character in the most amiable
light. He familiarised the Queen with all the complicated details of
foreign politics; he gave her the most sensible and wise advice; he
warned and encouraged her; he answered her enquiries with the minutest
care: and the warm affection to which he gave frequent expression is a
very sacred and beautiful thing to contemplate.

We have selected several of the Princess Victoria's letters to the
King of the Belgians before her accession, because they throw a
remarkable light upon her temperament. In the first place, they reveal
the deep affectionateness of her character, and, what is still more
remarkable at her age, her frankness and outspokenness in expressing
her feelings.

In the second place, they show with what interest and eagerness the
Princess was following the course of foreign politics. Her view was
naturally a personal one, but it may be said that there can have been
very few, if any, girls in England, of the Princess's age, who were
taking any interest at all in Continental affairs. It is true that
King Leopold had early impressed upon the Princess that it was a
duty to become acquainted with the course of current events; but the
letters show that the interest she felt was congenial and innate, and
did not spring from a sense of duty. The allusions to home politics
are not so frequent, but still show that here also her attention was
alert.

Thirdly, they reveal her abounding vitality, her love of life and
amusement, her devotion to music, and the simple unspoilt zest with
which she threw herself into all that surrounded her.

There is a special interest which attaches to the correspondence
between Queen Victoria and King Leopold after the Accession. The
letters reveal, as no other documents could do, the monarchical point
of view. However intimate may be the relations between a Sovereign
and a subject, there is bound to appear a certain discretion, and
even condescension, on the one hand, and on the other a due degree of
deference. But here we have the remarkable spectacle of two monarchs,
both of eminent sagacity, and both, so to speak, frankly interested in
the task of constitutional government, corresponding freely on all the
difficulties and problems inseparable from their momentous task,
and with an immense sense of their weighty responsibilities. It is
impossible to exaggerate the deep and abiding interest of such a
correspondence; and the seriousness, the devotion, the public spirit
that are displayed, without affectation or calculated impressiveness,
make the whole series of letters singularly memorable.

The King of the Belgians had married Princess Louise of Orleans,
daughter of Louis Philippe, in 1832. She was only seven years older
than the Princess Victoria, who grew to regard her with the tenderest
affection.

The letters from Queen Louise are very numerous. A few are in French,
but they are mostly written in brisk, lively English, not always very
correct, either in construction or in spelling. They are full of small
family details--the movements of various relations, the improvement in
her brothers' looks, Court festivities, the childish ailments of her
little boys, the journeys and expeditions, recollections of Windsor,
their visitors, elaborate descriptions of dresses--interesting to
read, but difficult to select from. They are full of heart-felt
expressions of the sincerest affection for "your dear Majesty," a
quaint phrase that often occurs.


[Pageheading: PRINCE ALBERT]

After their marriage in 1840, Prince Albert naturally became the
Queen's confidential Secretary.

A close study of the Queen's correspondence reveals the character of
the Prince in a way which nothing else could effect. Traces of
his untiring labour, his conscientious vigilance, his singular
devotedness, appear on every page. There are innumerable memoranda in
his own hand; the papers are throughout arranged and annotated by him;
nothing seems to have escaped him, nothing to have dismayed him. As
an instance of the minute laboriousness which characterised the Royal
household, it may be mentioned that there are many copies of important
letters, forwarded to the Prince for his perusal, the originals of
which had to be returned, written not only by the Prince himself, but
by the Queen under his direction. But besides keeping a vigilant eye
upon politics, the Prince took the lead in all social and educational
movements of the time, as well as devoting a close and continuous
attention to the affairs of Europe in general, and Germany in
particular. It is obvious from the papers that the Prince can hardly
ever have taken a holiday; many hours of every day must have been
devoted by him to work; yet he was at the same time a tender husband
and father, always ready with advice and sympathy, and devoted to
quiet domestic life.

After the Queen's marriage the correspondence becomes far more
voluminous. It is difficult to exaggerate the amount of conscientious
labour bestowed by the Queen and the Prince Consort on all matters
which concerned the welfare of the nation. The number of documents
which passed through their hands, and which were carefully studied by
them, was prodigious.

The drafts of the Queen's replies to letters are in many cases in the
handwriting of the Prince Consort, but dated by herself, and often
containing interlinear corrections and additions of her own. Whether
the Queen indicated the lines of the replies, whether she dictated the
substance of them, or whether they contain the result of a discussion
on the particular matter, cannot be precisely ascertained. But
they contain so many phrases and turns of expression which are
characteristic of her outspoken temperament, that it is clear that
she not only followed every detail, but that the substance of
the communication bore in most cases the impress of her mind. A
considerable number of the drafts again are in her own hand, with
interlinear corrections and additions by the Prince; and these so
strongly resemble in style the drafts in the handwriting of the
Prince, that it is clear that the Queen did not merely accept
suggestions, but that she had a strong opinion of her own on important
matters, and that this opinion was duly expressed.

One fact must, however, be borne in mind. It happens in many cases
that a correspondence on some particular point seems to be about to
lead up to a definite conclusion, but that the salient and decisive
document is absent. In these cases it is clear that the matter was
settled at a personal interview; in many cases the Prince prepared
a memorandum of an important interview; but there are a considerable
number of such correspondences, where no record is preserved of the
eventual solution, and this incompleteness is regrettable, but, by the
nature of the case, inevitable.


[Pageheading: LEADING STATESMEN IN 1837]

The young Queen, on coming to the Throne, had little technical
knowledge of the details of diplomacy, but she already had a real and
intelligent acquaintance with foreign affairs, though it was rather
personal than political, and, as we have seen, was more inspired by
her interest in the fortunes and position of her numerous maternal
relations than by the political views of her paternal relatives. Among
the English statesmen of the day there were few who were qualified
to help and instruct her. The two men who for over twenty years
alternately guided the foreign policy of the country were Lord
Aberdeen and Lord Palmerston. They represented two opposed schools.
Lord Aberdeen, a Peelite, was naturally and by tradition inclined to
desire harmonious relations with all foreign Powers, and to abstain,
as far as was consistent with maintaining British interests, from any
sort of intervention in European affairs; Palmerston was a disciple of
Canning, who had definitely broken with the principles of the Congress
of Vienna, and openly avowed his approval of a policy of intervention,
to any extent short of actual war, in the interests of liberty and
good government. The only other man who had any title to speak with
authority on foreign affairs was the Duke of Wellington, who had held
the seals as Foreign Secretary for a few months in 1834 and 1835. He
had, however, lost much of the reputation for political sagacity which
he had held at the time when he was the arbiter of Europe and virtual
ruler of France. Moreover, being, as he was, a much occupied man, with
varied business to transact, and at the mercy of his almost excessive
conscientiousness, he held himself to a considerable extent aloof
from current politics, though he never lost his absorbing interest in
Continental affairs.




CHAPTER IV

1821-1835


[The first letter ever received by Queen Victoria appears to be the
following little note, written by the Duchess of Clarence, afterwards
Queen Adelaide, in May 1821, when the Princess entered upon her third
year. It is pathetic to recollect that the Duchess's surviving child,
Princess Elizabeth, had died, aged three months, in March of the same
year.]




MY DEAR LITTLE HEART,--I hope you are well and don't forget Aunt
Adelaide, who loves you so fondly.

Loulou and Wilhelm[1] desire their love to you, and Uncle William
also.

God bless and preserve you is the constant prayer of your most truly
affectionate Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 1: Princess Louise and Prince William of
    Saxe-Weimar, children of Duchess Ida of Saxe-Weimar (sister
    of the Duchess of Clarence). They were the eldest brother and
    sister of Prince Edward of Saxe-Weimar.]




_The Duchess of Clarence to the Princess Victoria._

_24th May 1822._

Uncle William and Aunt Adelaide send their love to _dear little
Victoria_ with their best wishes on her birthday, and hope that she
will now become a _very good Girl_, being now _three years old_. Uncle
William and Aunt Adelaide also beg little Victoria to give dear Mamma
and to dear Sissi[2] a kiss in their name, and to Aunt Augusta,[3]
Aunt Mary[4] and Aunt Sophia[5] too, and also to the _big Doll_. Uncle
William and Aunt Adelaide are very sorry to be absent on that day and
not to see their _dear, dear_ little Victoria, as they are sure she
will be very good and obedient to dear Mamma on that day, and on many,
many others. They also hope that dear little Victoria will not forget
them and know them again when Uncle and Aunt return.

To dear little Xandrina Victoria.

    [Footnote 2: Princess Feodore, the Queen's half-sister.]

    [Footnote 3: Augusta, daughter of Frederick, Landgrave of
    Hesse-Cassel, wife of the Duke of Cambridge.]

    [Footnote 4: Princess Mary, a daughter of George III., married
    to her cousin the Duke of Gloucester.]

    [Footnote 5: Princess Sophia, daughter of George III.]




[Pageheading: EARLY LETTERS]


[The following is the earliest letter preserved of the long series
written by the Queen to King (then Prince) Leopold. The Princess was
then nine years old.]




KENSINGTON PALACE, _25th November 1823._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I wish you many happy returns of your birthday; I
very often think of you, and I hope to see you soon again, for I am
very fond of you. I see my Aunt Sophia[6] often, who looks very well,
and is very well. I use every day your pretty soup-basin. Is it very
warm in Italy? It is so mild here, that I go out every day. Mama is
tolerable well and am quite well. Your affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA.

_P.S._--I am very angry with you, Uncle, for you have never written to
me once since you went, and that is a long while.

    [Footnote 6: Princess Sophia, daughter of George III.]




_Prince Leopold_[7] _to the Princess Victoria._

PARIS, _20th April 1829._

MY DEAREST LOVE,--Though in a few days I hope to have the happiness
of seeing you, still I wish to recall myself even before that time to
your recollection, and to tell you how delighted I shall be to embrace
my dearest little child. I have travelled far over the world and shall
be able to give you some curious information about various matters.

Stockmar, who was very ill, and whom I despaired of seeing here, did
arrive before yesterday,[8] and you may guess what pleasure it gave
me. Now I will conclude; _au revoir_, and let me find you grown,
blooming, and kind to your old and faithful Uncle,

LEOPOLD.

    [Footnote 7: Afterwards King of the Belgians.]

    [Footnote 8: I.e. _avant hier_.]




[Pageheading: BIRTHDAY LETTERS]


_The Princess Hohenlohe[9] to the Princess Victoria._

[_May 1829._]

If I had wings and could fly like a bird, I should fly in at your
window like the little robin to-day, and wish you many very happy
returns of the 24th, and tell you how I love you, dearest sister, and
how often I think of you and long to see you. I think if I were once
with you again I could not leave you so soon. I should wish to stay
with you, and what would poor Ernest[9] say if I were to leave him so
long? He would perhaps try to fly after me, but I fear he would not
get far; he is rather tall and heavy for flying. So you see I have
nothing left to do but to write to you, and wish you in this way all
possible happiness and joy for this and many, many years to come. I
hope you will spend a very merry birthday. How I wish to be with you,
dearest Victoire, on that day!

I have not thanked you, I believe, for a very dear letter you have
written to me, which gave me the greatest pleasure. Your descriptions
of the plays you had seen amused me very much. I wish I had seen your
performance too. Your most affectionate Sister,

FEODORE.

    [Footnote 9: The Princess Feodore of Leiningen, the Queen's
    half-sister, had married, in January 1828, the Prince (Ernest)
    of Hohenlohe-Langenburg.]




_The Duchess of Clarence to the Princess Victoria._

BUSHEY PARK, _14th August 1829._

A thousand thanks to you, dear Victoria, for your very nice and
well-written letter full of good wishes, which I had the pleasure to
receive yesterday; and many thanks more for the pretty gifts your dear
Mamma has sent me in your name. I wore them last night for your sake,
dearest child, and thought of you _very often_.

It gives me great satisfaction to hear that you are enjoying the sea
air and like the place which you now occupy. I wish I could pay your
Mamma a visit there and see you again, my dear little niece, for I
long to have that pleasure, and must resign myself at being deprived
of it some time longer. Your Uncle desires to be most kindly
remembered to you, and hopes to receive soon also a letter from you,
of whom he is as fond as I am. We speak of you very often, and trust
that you will always consider us to be amongst your best friends....

God bless you, my dear Victoria, is always the prayer of your most
truly affectionate Aunt,

ADELAIDE.




_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _22nd May 1832._

MY DEAREST LOVE,--Let me offer you my _sincerest_ and _best_ wishes on
the return of the anniversary of your birthday. May heaven protect and
prosper you, and shower all its best blessings on you.

Time flies: it is now thirteen years that you came into the world
of trouble; I therefore can hardly venture to call you any longer a
little Princess.

This will make you feel, my dear Love, that you must give your
attention more and more to graver matters. By the dispensation of
Providence you are destined to fill a most eminent station; to fill
it _well_ must now become your study. A good heart and a trusty and
honourable character are amongst the most indispensable qualifications
for that position.

You will always find in your Uncle that faithful friend which he
has proved to you from your earliest infancy, and whenever you feel
yourself in want of support or advice, call on him with perfect
confidence.

If circumstances permitted my leaving Ostend early to-morrow morning,
I should be able to place myself my birthday present into your fair
hair; as this happiness has not fallen to my lot, your excellent
mother has promised to act as my representative.

You will probably have little time to spare. I therefore conclude with
the assurance of the sincere attachment and affection with which I
shall ever be, my dearest Love, your faithful and devoted Friend and
Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN OF THE BELGIANS]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN,[10] _31st August 1832._

MY DEAREST LOVE,--You told me you wished to have a description of your
new Aunt.[11] I therefore shall both mentally and physically describe
her to you.

She is extremely gentle and amiable, her actions are always guided by
principles. She is at all times ready and disposed to sacrifice her
comfort and inclinations to see others happy. She values goodness,
merit, and virtue much more than beauty, riches, and amusements. With
all this she is highly informed and very clever; she speaks and writes
English, German and Italian; she speaks English very well indeed.
In short, my dear Love, you see that I may well recommend her as an
example for all young ladies, being Princesses or not.

Now to her appearance. She is about Feodore's height, her hair
very fair, light blue eyes, of a very gentle, intelligent and kind
expression. A Bourbon nose and small mouth. The figure is much like
Feodore's but rather less stout. She rides very well, which she proved
to my great alarm the other day, by keeping her seat though a horse of
mine ran away with her full speed for at least half a mile. What she
does particularly well is dancing. Music unfortunately she is not
very fond of, though she plays on the harp; I believe there is some
idleness in the case. There exists already great confidence and
affection between us; she is desirous of doing everything that can
contribute to my happiness, and I study whatever can make her happy
and contented.

You will see by these descriptions that though my good little wife is
not the tallest Queen, she is a very great prize which I highly value
and cherish....

Now it is time I should finish my letter. Say everything that is kind
to good Lehzen, and believe me ever, my dearest Love, your faithful
Friend and Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 10: The Royal Palace, four miles from Brussels,
    which Napoleon owned for many years. A monument to King
    Leopold now stands there.]

    [Footnote 11: Louise Marie, Princess of Orleans, daughter of
    King Louis Philippe of France, was married to King Leopold on
    9th August 1832.]




[Pageheading: A BIRTHDAY LETTER]

[Pageheading: VALUABLE ADVICE]

_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _21st May 1833._

MY DEAREST LOVE,--To make quite sure of my birthday congratulations
reaching you on that day, I send them by to-day's messenger, and
confide them to the care of your illustrious mother.

My sincere good wishes for many happy returns of that day which
gave you, dear little soul, to us, will be accompanied by some few
reflections, which the serious aspect of our times calls forth.
My dearest Love, you are now fourteen years old, a period when
the delightful pastimes of childhood must be mixed with thoughts
appertaining already to a matured part of your life. I know that you
have been very studious, but now comes the time when the judgment must
form itself, when the character requires attention; in short when the
young tree takes the shape which it retains afterwards through life.

To attain this object it is indispensable to give some little time _to
reflection_. The life in a great town is little calculated for such
purposes; however, with some firmness of purpose it can be done.

_Self-examination_ is the most important part of the business, and
a very useful mode of proceeding is, for instance, every evening to
recapitulate the events of the day, and the motives which made one act
oneself, as well as to try to guess what might have been the motives
of others. Amiable dispositions like yours will easily perceive
if your own motives _were good_. Persons in high situations must
particularly guard themselves against selfishness and vanity. An
individual in a high and important situation will easily see a great
many persons eager to please the first, and to flatter and encourage
the last. Selfishness, however, makes the individual itself miserable,
and is the cause of constant disappointment, besides being the surest
means of being disliked by everybody.

Vanity, on the other hand, is generally artfully used by ambitious and
interested people to make one a tool for purposes of their own, but
too often in opposition with one's own happiness and destruction of
it.

To learn to know oneself, to judge oneself with truth and
impartiality, must be the great objects of one's exertion; they are
only attainable by constant and cool self-examination.

The position of what is generally called great people has of late
become extremely difficult. They are more attacked and calumniated,
and judged with less indulgence than private individuals. What they
have lost in this way, they have not by any means regained in any
other. Ever since the revolution of 1790 they are much less secure
than they used to be, and the transition from sovereign power to
_absolute want_ has been as frequent as sudden.

It becomes, therefore, necessary that the character should be so
formed as not to be intoxicated by greatness and success, nor
cast down by misfortune. To be able to do so, one must be able to
appreciate things according to their real value, and particularly
avoid giving to trifles an undue importance.

Nothing is so great and clear a proof of unfitness for greater and
nobler actions, than a mind which is seriously occupied with trifles.

Trifling matters may be objects of amusement and relaxation to a
clever person, but only a weak mind and a mean spirit consider trifles
as important. The good sense must show itself by distinguishing what
is and what is not important.

My sermon is now long enough, my dear child. I strongly recommend it,
however, to your reflection and consideration.

My gift consists in a set of views of the former Kingdom of the
Netherlands, out of which you will be able to discover all those of
the present Belgium.

Let me soon hear from you; and may God bless and preserve you. Ever,
my dear Love, your affectionate Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: VISIT TO HEVER CASTLE]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

TUNBRIDGE WELLS, _14th September 1834._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Allow me to write you a few words, to express
how thankful I am for the very kind letter you wrote me. It made me,
though, very sad to think that all our hopes of seeing you, which we
cherished so long, this year, were over. I had so hoped and wished to
have seen you again, my _beloved_ Uncle, and to have made dearest
Aunt Louisa's acquaintance. I am delighted to hear that dear Aunt has
benefited from the sea air and bathing. We had a very pretty party to
Hever Castle yesterday, which perhaps you remember, where Anne Boleyn
used to live, _before she lost her head_. We drove there, and rode
home. It was a most beautiful day. We have very good accounts from
dear Feodore, who will, by this time, be at Langenburg.

Believe me always, my dearest Uncle, your very affectionate and
dutiful Niece,

VICTORIA.




[Pageheading: HISTORICAL READING]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _18th October 1834._

MY DEAREST LOVE,--I am happy to learn that Tunbridge Wells has done
you good. Health is the first and most important gift of Providence;
without it we are poor, miserable creatures, though the whole earth
were our property; therefore I trust that you will take great care of
your own. I feel convinced that air and exercise are most useful for
you. In your leisure moments I hope that you study a little; history
is what I think the most important study for you. It will be difficult
for you to learn human-kind's ways and manners otherwise than from
that important source of knowledge. Your position will more or less
render practical knowledge extremely difficult for you, till you get
old, and still if you do not prepare yourself for your position, you
may become the victim of wicked and designing people, particularly at
a period when party spirit runs so high. Our times resemble most those
of the Protestant reformation; then people were moved by religious
opinions, as they now undoubtedly are by political passions.
Unfortunately history is rarely written by those who really were
the chief movers of events, nor free from a party colouring; this
is particularly the case in the works about English history. In that
respect France is much richer, because there we have authenticated
memoirs of some of the most important men, and of others who really
saw what passed and wrote it down at the time. Political feelings,
besides, rarely created _permanent_ parties like those in England,
with the exception, perhaps, of the great distinctions of Catholics
and Protestants. What I most should recommend is the period before the
accession of Henry IV. of France to the throne, then the events after
his death till the end of the minority of Louis XIV.; after that
period, though interesting, matters have a character which is more
personal, and therefore less applicable to the present times. Still
even that period may be studied with some profit to get knowledge of
mankind. _Intrigues_ and _favouritism_ were the chief features of that
period, and Madame de Maintenon's immense influence was very nearly
the cause of the destruction of France. What I very particularly
recommend to you is to study in the Memoirs of the great and good
Sully[12] the last years of the reign of Henry IV. of France, and the
events which followed his assassination. If you have not got the work,
I will forward it to you from hence, or give you the edition which I
must have at Claremont.

As my paper draws to a close, I shall finish also by giving you my
best blessings, and remain ever, my dearest Love, your faithfully
attached Friend and Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 12: Maximilien, Duc de Sully, was Henry's Minister
    of Finance. A curious feature of the Memoirs is the fact that
    they are written in the second person: the historian recounts
    the hero's adventures to him.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCESS'S READING]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

TUNBRIDGE WELLS, _22nd October 1834._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--You cannot conceive how happy you have made me, by
your very kind letter, which, instead of tiring, delights me beyond
everything. I must likewise say how very grateful I feel for the kind
and excellent advice you gave me in it.

For the autographs I beg to return my best thanks. They are
most valuable and interesting, and will be great additions to my
collections. As I have not got Sully's Memoirs, I shall be delighted
if you will be so good as to give them to me. Reading history is one
of my greatest delights, and perhaps, dear Uncle, you might like to
know which books in that line I am now reading. In my lessons with the
Dean of Chester,[13] I am reading Russell's _Modern Europe_,[14] which
is very interesting, and Clarendon's _History of the Rebellion_. It
is drily written, but is full of instruction. I like reading different
authors, of different opinions, by which means I learn not to lean on
one particular side. Besides my lessons, I read Jones'[15] account
of the wars in Spain, Portugal and the South of France, from the year
1808 till 1814. It is well done, I think, and amuses me very much. In
French, I am now in _La Rivalité de la France et de l'Espagne_, par
Gaillard,[16] which is very interesting. I have also begun Rollin.[17]
I am very fond of making tables of the Kings and Queens, as I go on,
and I have lately finished one of the English Sovereigns and their
consorts, as, of course, the history of my own country is one of
my first duties. I should be fearful of tiring you with so long an
account of myself, were I not sure you take so great an interest in my
welfare.

Pray give my most affectionate love to _dearest_ Aunt Louisa, and
please say to the Queen of the French and the two Princesses how
grateful I am for their kind remembrance of me.

Believe me always, my dearest Uncle, your very affectionate, very
dutiful, and most attached Niece,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 13: The Rev. George Davys. See _ante_, p. 15.
    (Ch. II, Footnote 4)]

    [Footnote 14: This _History of Modern Europe_, in a series of
    letters from a nobleman to his son, 5 vols. (1779-1784),
    deals with the rise of modern kingdoms down to the Peace of
    Westphalia (1648).]

    [Footnote 15: Sir John Thomas Jones, Bart. (1783-1843), a
    Royal Engineer, who served in the Peninsular War.]

    [Footnote 16: Gabriel Henri Gaillard (1726-1806), Member of
    the French Academy.]

    [Footnote 17: The _Histoire Ancienne_, by Charles Rollin
    (1661-1741), Rector of the University of Paris.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

ST. LEONARDS, _19th November 1834._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--It is impossible for me to express how happy you
have made me by writing so soon again to me, and how pleased I am to
see by your very kind letter that you intend to write to me often. I
am much obliged to you, dear Uncle, for the extract about Queen Anne,
but must beg you, as you have sent me to show what a Queen _ought not_
to be, that you will send me what a Queen _ought to be_.[18]

Might I ask what is the very pretty seal with which the letter I got
from you yesterday was closed? It is so peculiar that I am anxious to
know.

Believe me always, dear Uncle, your very affectionate, very dutiful,
and very attached Niece,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 18: King Leopold had sent the Princess an extract
    from a French Memoir, containing a severe criticism of the
    political character of Queen Anne.]




_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _2nd December 1834._

MY DEAREST LOVE,--You have written a very clever, sharp little letter
the other day, which gave me great pleasure. Sure enough, when I show
you what a Queen ought not to be, I also ought to tell you what she
should be, and this task I will very conscientiously take upon myself
on the very first occasion which may offer itself for a confidential
communication. Now I must conclude, to go to town. I must, however,
say that I have given orders to send you Sully's Memoirs. As they have
not been written exclusively for young ladies, it will be well to have
Lehzen to read it with you, and to judge what ought to be left for
some future time. And now God bless you! Ever, my beloved child, your
attached Friend and Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: A NEW YEAR GREETING]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

ST. LEONARDS, _28th December 1834._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I must again, with your permission, write you a few
lines, to wish you a very happy new year, not only for _this_ year,
but for _many_ to come. I know not how to thank you sufficiently for
the _invaluable_ and precious autographs which you were so very kind
as to send me. Some of them I received a few days ago, and the others
to-day, accompanied by a very kind letter from you, and a beautiful
shawl, which will be most useful to me, particularly as a favourite
one of mine is growing very old. I wish you could come here, for
many reasons, but also to be an eye-witness of my extreme prudence in
eating, which would astonish you. The poor sea-gulls are, however,
not so happy as you imagine, for they have great enemies in the
country-people here, who take pleasure in shooting them.

Believe me always, my dearest Uncle, your very affectionate and most
grateful Niece,

VICTORIA.




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

KENSINGTON PALACE, _2nd February 1835._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I know not how to thank you sufficiently for
the most valuable autographs you were kind enough to send me. I am
particularly delighted with that of Louis Quatorze, "le grand Roi,"
and my great admiration.... You will not, I hope, think me very
troublesome if I venture to ask for two more autographs which I should
very particularly like to have; they are Mme. de Sévigné's[19] and
Racine's; as I am reading the letters of the former, and the tragedies
of the latter, I should prize them highly. Believe me always, my
dearest Uncle, your most affectionate and dutiful Niece,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 19: Marie de Rabutin Chantal, Marquise de Sévigné,
    born 1626. At twenty-four she was left a widow, and devoted
    herself to her children's education. When her daughter married
    the Count de Grignan, she began that correspondence with her
    on which her reputation chiefly rests. She died in 1696, and
    the letters were first published in 1726.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCESS'S CONFIRMATION]

[Pageheading: HONESTY AND SINCERITY]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

CAMP OF BEVERLOO (in the North of the Province of Limburg), _3rd
August 1835._

MY DEAR LOVE,--By your Mother's letter of the 31st ult^o., I learned
of the serious and important action in your young life[20] which has
passed recently, and I cannot let it pass without saying some words
on the subject. I am perhaps rather strangely situated for a
preaching--somewhat in the style of those old camp preachers who held
forth to many thousand people on some heath in Scotland. I am also
on an immense heath, surrounded by 16,000 men, mostly young and
gay, cooking, singing, working, and not very like the stern old
Covenanters; however, I shall try. First of all, let me congratulate
you that it passed happily and well off. Secondly, let me entreat you
to look with a serious and reflective mind on the day which is past.
Many are the religions, many the shades of those religions, but it
must be confessed the principles of the Christian religion are the
most perfect and the most beautiful that can be imagined.... There is
one virtue which is particularly Christian; this is the knowledge of
our own heart in _real humility_. _Hypocrisy_ is a besetting sin of
all times, but _particularly of the present_, and many are the wolves
in sheep's clothes. I am sorry to say, with all my affection for old
England, the very _state of its Society and politics_ renders many in
that country _essentially humbugs and deceivers_; the _appearance_ of
the thing is generally _more_ considered than the _reality_; provided
matters go off well, and opinion may be gained, the _real good is
matter of the most perfect indifference_. Defend yourself, my dear
love, against this system; let your dear character always be true
and loyal; this does not _exclude prudence_--worldly concerns are
now unfortunately so organised that you _must be cautious_ or you may
injure yourself and others--but it does not prevent the being sterling
and true. Nothing in persons gives greater reliance, greater weight,
than when they are known to be _true_. From your earliest childhood
I was anxious to see in you this important virtue _saved_ and
_developed_, and Lehzen will still be able to recollect that. If it is
God's pleasure that you should once[21] fill the arduous situation to
which you seem destined, you will find the importance of what I now
say to you. And when others may tremble to have at last their real
character found out, and to meet all the contempt which they may
deserve, your mind and heart will be still and happy, because it will
know that it acts honestly, that truth and goodness are the motives of
its actions. I press you now against my heart; may God bless you as
I wish and hope it, and may you always feel some affection for your
sincerely devoted camp preacher and Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 20: The Princess was confirmed at the Chapel Royal,
    on 30th July 1835.]

    [Footnote 21: King Leopold not infrequently uses "once" like
    the Latin _olim_, as referring to any indefinite date in the
    future as well as in the past. "Some day" is what is intended
    here.]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER V


THE year 1836 was not an eventful one at home; the Whig Ministry were
too weak to carry measures of first-rate importance, and could hardly
have maintained themselves in power against the formidable opposition
of Sir Robert Peel without the support of O'Connell. Parliament was
chiefly occupied by the consideration of the Secret Societies in
Ireland, Tithes, Municipal Corporations, and such matters; the
Marriage Act, and the Act for the Registration of Births have probably
been the most important measures of the year to the country. Troubles
which were destined to become more acute arose in Lower Canada and
Jamaica, both taking the form of disputes between the executive and
the legislature.

On the continent of Europe, affairs were more disturbing. Several
attempts were made on the life of the King of the French, while an
abortive insurrection with a view of establishing a military empire
was made by Louis Bonaparte at Strasburg. The Prince was allowed to
leave the country and go to the United States, but his accomplices
were detained for trial. In Algiers the French Government determined
to prosecute operations against the Arab Chief Abd-el-Kader, and they
sent an expedition to Constantin.

Holland and Belgium were occupied with a dispute about their boundary
line, the cession to Belgium of Luxemburg being the chief point
of difference. The difficulties that arose in passing an important
Municipal Act for Belgium caused King Leopold temporarily to regret he
had not accepted the throne of Greece.

Portugal was still convulsed by revolutionary agitation. Dom Pedro,
the eldest son of King John VI., had been proclaimed Emperor of Brazil
in his father's lifetime, and had abdicated the throne of Portugal in
favour of his daughter Donna Maria, a child seven years old, while Dom
Miguel, his younger brother, who had acted in opposition to his father
in Portugal, claimed the throne for himself. Dom Pedro had agreed that
his daughter should marry Miguel, who was in 1827 appointed Regent.
Miguel, had he acted wisely, might have maintained himself on
the throne, but Dom Pedro, who had been expelled from Brazil by a
revolution, took active steps to recover the Portuguese throne for
his daughter, and equipped an expedition for that end with English and
French volunteers. In this way, Donna Maria, who had spent part of her
exile in England, and formed a friendship with the Princess Victoria,
was through British instrumentality placed on her throne, but still
could only maintain herself with difficulty against Miguel. She was a
few weeks older than the Princess Victoria, and had recently lost her
first husband, the Duc de Leuchtenberg. She was married by proxy on
the 1st of January 1836, and in person on the 9th of April, to Prince
Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg.

There was also a disputed succession in Spain, where by the ancient
law women might succeed to the throne. Ferdinand VII., who had revoked
the Pragmatic Sanction of 1711 and restored the former system, died in
1833, leaving no son. His elder daughter Isabella, then three years
of age, was proclaimed Queen (her mother Christina being appointed
Regent), and Isabella's claims were recognised by England and France.
The late King's brother, Don Carlos, taking his stand upon the Salic
Law as established by the Pragmatic Sanction, raised the standard of
revolt and allied himself with Dom Miguel, the young Queens Maria
and Isabella mutually recognising each other, and being supported by
France and England against the "Holy Alliance" of Austria, Russia, and
Prussia. A seven years' civil war resulted, which did not end
till, from sheer exhaustion, the Carlists had to cease fighting the
Christinos, as the loyal party was called. The English Government in
the previous year had sanctioned the enlistment of 10,000 men; who,
commanded by Colonel (afterwards Sir de Lacy) Evans, landed at San
Sebastian in August to assist the Christinos. A British auxiliary
contingent was already with the Spanish army, while a naval squadron
under Lord John Hay was active on the coast. Mendizabal was Prime
Minister at the beginning of the year 1836, and was succeeded in May
by Isturitz. Riots took place at Madrid, and Isturitz fled to France;
Calatrava succeeding him, assisted by Mendizabal. The Christino cause
did not much advance during the year.




CHAPTER V

1836


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

_4th March 1836._

MY DEARLY BELOVED CHILD,--You wrote me again a long, _dear_, _good_
letter, like all those which I received from your kind hands. Time
approaches now for the arrival of the cousins, and most probably of
your Uncle Ferdinand also. He has informed me of his arrival for the
7th or 8th; notwithstanding this, I mean to leave everything settled
as it has been arranged. They will set off on the 7th, arrive at Paris
on the 8th, and leave it again on the 12th.... Fernando[1] has still a
very bad cold; change of air is likely to cure that. The stay here has
done Fernando a great deal of good, and it cannot be denied that he is
quite another person. It has given me some trouble, but I have written
down for him everything which he ought to know about the organisation
of a government _in general_, and what will be necessary in specie to
carry on successfully the Government in Portugal.... My inclinations,
as you are aware, would have led me to the East, but certainly the
only thing which reconciles me with my not having done so is that it
has made me to remain near you, and will enable me to see you and to
be useful to you.

    [Footnote 1: The Queen's first cousin, Prince Ferdinand (son
    of Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, who was brother of the
    Duchess of Kent and the King of the Belgians), aged nineteen,
    who married the Queen of Portugal on 9th April. He was at
    this time visiting the King of the Belgians on his way to
    Portugal.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

KENSINGTON PALACE, _7th March 1836._

... You are very kind, my dearest, best Uncle, to say that "the only
thing which reconciles you" for not having gone to Greece is, that you
are near me and can see me. Thank Heaven that you did not go there! it
would have been dreadful for me and for all your relations to be thus,
as it were, cut off from almost all intercourse! It is _hard_ enough,
that you are as far as you are, when I recollect the happy time when I
could see you, and be with you, _every_ day!...




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

KENSINGTON PALACE, _29th March 1836._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... As concerning the "fatigues" we are said to
have undergone, they were none to me, and made me very happy; I only
wish they could have lasted longer, for all, all is over now, and our
_beloved_ Ferdinand[2] himself leaves our shores this _very_ morning.
We accompanied them all on Sunday, where we took a final leave of our
dear Ferdinand, and I cannot tell you how sorry I was, and am, to see
him go, for I love him dearly. He is so truly excellent, kind,
and good, and endears himself so much by his simplicity and
good-heartedness! I may venture to say, that no one has his prosperity
and happiness more at heart than I have. I am extremely sanguine about
his success. He goes there full of courage, spirits, and goodwill,
and being naturally clever and observant, I doubt not that with good
counsel, and prudence, he will do very well. _Your_ kind advice will
be of the greatest and most important use to him, the more so as he is
so exceedingly fond of you.... Ferdinand leaves behind him here a most
favourable impression on all parties, for _I_ have even _heard_ from
some great Tories themselves that there was a great feeling _for_ him
in this country.

    [Footnote 2: See _ante_, p. 45. (Ch. V, Footnote 1).
    He had latterly been visiting the Duchess of Kent.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCES ERNEST AND ALBERT]


_The Princess Hohenlohe to the Princess Victoria._

STUTTGART, _16th April 1836._

... You will like our two Coburg cousins also, I think; they are more
manly than I think the two others are, after the description. I am
very fond of them both. Ernest is my favourite, although Albert
is much handsomer, and cleverer too, but Ernest is so honest and
good-natured. I shall be very curious to hear your opinion upon
them....




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

KENSINGTON PALACE, _26th April 1836._

MY DEAREST, BEST UNCLE,-- ... You will, I am sure, have been delighted
with M. de Neumann's[3] account of the complete success of our dear
Ferdinand. All has gone off better than even our most sanguine hopes
could have desired. He is much pleased with the good Queen, and she is
delighted with him, and M. de Neumann says that they are already quite
happy together. This is really a great blessing, but I fear that all
the _exterior_ affairs are not in quite _so_ good a state. I hope,
however, that the good people will not make any more difficulties
about Fernando's being Commander-in-Chief, as I hear from all accounts
it is necessary he should be so....

Uncle Ernest and my cousins will probably come here in the beginning
of next month, I hear, and will visit you on their return.

You ask me about Sully's Memoirs, and if I have finished them. I have
not finished them, but am reading them with great interest, and find
there is a great deal in them which applies to the present times, and
a great deal of good advice and reasoning in them. As you say, very
truly, it is extremely necessary for me to follow the "events of the
day," and to do so impartially. I am always both grateful and happy
when you give me any advice, and hope you will continue to do so as
long as I live.

I am glad to hear you approve my singing, and I cannot tell you how
delightful it would be for me, if you could join with us. _À propos_,
dear Uncle, you did not answer what I said to you in a former letter
about your visiting us again. You know, dear Uncle, that this is a
subject upon which I am very _earnest_ and _very_ eager, and as the
summer approaches I grow more and more anxious about it. You know,
also, that _pleasure_ does more good than a hundred walks and rides.

Believe me always, my dearest Uncle, your truly devoted and attached
Niece,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 3: Baron Neumann, who acted as Minister
    Plenipotentiary during the absences of Prince Esterhazy,
    succeeded him as Austrian Minister in 1842. He married Lady
    Augusta Somerset in 1844.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE OF ORANGE]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

_13th May 1836._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--I got this time a very small letter from your good
little Ladyship, and I shall repay it probably in larger coin, as my
letter going through a messenger of my own will become longer, as it
will be more confidential than through the usual mode of conveyance.

I am really _astonished_ at the conduct of your old Uncle the King;
this invitation of the Prince of Orange and his sons, this forcing him
upon others, is very extraordinary.[4] It is so, because persons in
political stations and champions of great political passions cannot
put aside their known character as you would lay your hat upon a
table.

Not later than yesterday I got a half official communication from
England, insinuating that it would be _highly_ desirable that the
visit of _your_ relatives _should not take place, this year--qu'en
dites-vous_? The relations of the Queen and the King, therefore, to
the God-knows-what degree, are to come in shoals and rule the land,
when _your relations_ are to be _forbidden_ the country, and that
when, as you know, the whole of your relations have ever been very
dutiful and kind to the King. Really and truly I never heard or saw
anything like it, and I hope it will a _little rouse your spirit_;
now that slavery is even abolished in the British Colonies, I do not
comprehend _why your lot alone should be to be kept, a white little
slavey in England_, for the pleasure of the Court, who never bought
you, as I am not aware of their having gone to any expense on that
head, or the King's even having _spent a sixpence for your existence_.
I expect that my visits in England will also be prohibited by an Order
in Council. Oh consistency and political or _other honesty_, where
must one look for you!

I have not the least doubt that the King, in his passion for the
Oranges, will be _excessively rude to your relations_; this, however,
will not signify much; they are _your guests_ and not _his_, and will
therefore _not_ mind it....

    [Footnote 4: King Leopold had for some time cherished a hope
    of uniting the Princess Victoria in marriage with her cousin,
    Prince Albert of Coburg. He therefore arranged that the
    Prince, with his elder brother, Prince Ernest, should pay
    a visit to the Duchess of Kent at Kensington Palace. King
    William naturally opposed a scheme which he knew met with
    the approval of his sister-in-law. He accordingly invited
    the Prince of Orange and his two sons at the same time, and
    favoured the candidature of the younger son, Prince Alexander.
    The King (it is believed) went so far as to say that no
    other marriage should ever take place, and that the Duke of
    Saxe-Coburg and his son should never put foot in the country;
    they should not be allowed to land, and must go back whence
    they came.

    The Prince of Orange had himself been a candidate for the hand
    of Princess Charlotte, and had no reason to be friendly to
    King Leopold, of whom it is recorded that he said, "Voilà un
    homme qui a pris ma femme et mon royaume."]





[Pageheading: ARRIVAL OF PRINCE ALBERT]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_23rd May 1836._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... Uncle Ernest and my cousins arrived here on
Wednesday, _sains et saufs_. Uncle is looking remarkably well, and my
cousins are most delightful young people. I will give you no detailed
description of them, as you will so soon see them yourself. But I
must say, that they are both very amiable, very kind and good, and
extremely merry, just as young people should be; with all that,
they are extremely sensible, and very fond of occupation. Albert is
extremely handsome, which Ernest certainly is not, but he has a most
good-natured, honest, and intelligent countenance. We took them to the
Opera on Friday, to see the _Puritani_, and as they are excessively
fond of music, like me, they were in perfect ecstasies, having never
heard any of the singers before....




[Pageheading: PRINCE ALBERT]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_7th June 1836._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--These few lines will be given to you by my dear
Uncle Ernest when he sees you.

I must thank you, my beloved Uncle, for the prospect of _great_
happiness you have contributed to give me, in the person of dear
Albert. Allow me, then, my dearest Uncle, to tell you how delighted I
am with him, and how much I like him in every way. He possesses every
quality that could be desired to render me perfectly happy. He is so
sensible, so kind, and so good, and so amiable too. He has, besides,
the most pleasing and delightful exterior and appearance you can
possibly see.

I have only now to beg you, my dearest Uncle, to take care of the
health of one, now _so dear_ to me, and to take him under _your
special_ protection. I hope and trust that all will go on prosperously
and well on this subject of so much importance to me.

Believe me always, my dearest Uncle, your most affectionate, devoted,
and grateful Niece,

VICTORIA.




[Pageheading: CONVERSATION]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

_17th June 1836._

MY DEAREST AND MOST BELOVED CHILD,--I begged your Mother, in the
meantime, to offer you my best thanks for your very pretty drawing
representing the Provost of Bruges and his daughter[5]; I admired also
that for your Aunt. They do your spirit of invention honour, and it is
a very good plan to draw subjects from books or plays which interest
you. You will feel the loss of a pleasant society in the old Palace,
the more so as your relations are good unsophisticated people, a thing
which one does not so often meet with. I suppose that part of your
London amusements will soon be over. You were going to Windsor,
which you will probably have left by this time. I hope you were very
prudent; I cannot disguise from you, that though the inhabitants are
good-natured people, still that I think you want all your natural
caution with them. Never permit yourself to be induced to tell them
any opinion or sentiment of yours which is _beyond the sphere of
common conversation_ and its ordinary topics. Bad use would be made
of it against yourself, and you cannot in that subject be too much
guarded. I know well the people we have to deal with. I am extremely
impartial, but I shall also always be equally watchful.... God bless
you! Ever, my dear child, your very devoted Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 5: Leading characters in _The Heiress of Bruges_, by
    Grattan.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_9th August 1836._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,-- ... I was sure you would be very much pleased with
Ernest and Albert as soon as you knew them more; there cannot be two
more good and sensible young men than they are. Pray, dear Uncle, say
everything most kind from me to them.

We go to Buxted[6] to-morrow morning, and stay there till next Monday.

All the gaieties are now over. We took leave of the Opera on Saturday,
and a most brilliant conclusion to the season it was. Yesterday I took
my farewell lesson with Lablache,[7] which I was very sorry to do. I
have had twenty-six lessons with him, and I look forward with pleasure
to resume them again next spring.

    [Footnote 6: Lord Liverpool's house. Charles Cecil Cope
    Jenkinson, third Earl of Liverpool, was fifty-three years old
    at the time of the Queen's accession. He was a moderate Tory,
    and had held office as Under-Secretary for the Home Department
    in 1807, and in 1809 as Under-Secretary for War and the
    Colonies. He succeeded to the Earldom in 1828. The title,
    since revived, became extinct on his death in 1851. He was a
    friend of the Duchess of Kent, who often stayed with him at
    Buxted Park in Sussex, and at Pitchford in Shropshire. At
    three successive visits at the latter house the Princess
    occupied the same small room without a fireplace.]

    [Footnote 7: Luigi Lablache (1794-1858), a famous
    opera-singer, was the Princess's singing-master.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_2nd September 1836._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... The state of Spain is most alarming and
unfortunate.[8] I do hope something will be done. The news were rather
better yesterday and the day before. The Christinos had gained a
victory over the Carlists.[9] I take a great interest in the whole of
this unfortunate affair. I hope and trust Portugal may not suffer by
all the affairs of Spain, but much is to be feared. Dieskau will have
told you much about the internal affairs, which seem to go on very
prosperously. Pray has the Duchess of Braganza[10] written to you or
Aunt Louise since Ferdinand's marriage?

You did not send me the King of Naples'[11] letter, as you said you
would; pray do so in your next letter. I hope he will come here next
year. You do not mention France, so I hope all is quiet. The Duke of
Orleans is quite well again, I am happy to hear from Aunt Louise. Now
I must conclude, begging you to believe me, always, your most truly
attached and really devoted Niece,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 8: See Introductory Note for the year, _ante_, p. 44.
    (to Ch. V)]

    [Footnote 9: The civil war was favourable to the Carlists at
    this time, General Gomez obtaining a victory on 30th August.
    By the end of the year he had twice traversed the kingdom,
    hampered with plunder and prisoners, and surrounded by armies
    greater than his own, and in no district did he find the
    inhabitants disposed to act against him.]

    [Footnote 10: Step-mother of the Queen of Portugal.]

    [Footnote 11: Ferdinand II., commonly named "Bomba." He
    married _en secondes noces_, the Archduchess Theresa of
    Austria.]




[Pageheading: A FAREWELL LETTER]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._[12]

CLAREMONT, _21st September 1836._

MY MOST DEARLY BELOVED UNCLE,--As I hear that Mamma is going to send a
letter to you which will reach you at Dover, and though it is only an
hour and a half since we parted, I must write you one line to tell you
how _very, very sad_ I am that you have left us, and to repeat, what
I think you know pretty well, _how_ much I love you. When I think
that but two hours ago we were happily together, and that now you are
travelling every instant farther and farther away from us, and that I
shall with all probability not see you for a _year_, it makes me cry.
Yes, dearest Uncle, it is dreadful in this life, that one is destined,
and _particularly unhappy me_, to be almost always separated from
those one loves most dearly. I live, however, in the hopes of your
visit next year with dear Aunt, and I cannot say how thankful and
happy I am that we have had you here for six short, and to me _most
bright happy_ days! I shall look back with the greatest delight on
them.

Believe me, always, your ever devoted and most affectionately attached
Niece and _Child_,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 12: Written at the conclusion of the King's visit to
    England.]





[Pageheading: THE PRINCESS AND THE CHURCH]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _11th November 1836._

MY VERY DEAR CHILD,-- ...I know attempts have been made to represent
you as indifferent to the established Church. You know that in England
the Sovereign is the head of the Church, and that the Church looks
upon the Protestant religion as it is established as the _State_
Religion. In times like the present, when the Crown is already a good
deal weakened, I believe that it is of importance to maintain as much
as possible this state of affairs, and I believe that you will do
well, whenever an occasion offers itself to do so without affectation,
to express your sincere interest for the Church, and that you
comprehend its position and count upon its good-will. The poor Church
will be a good deal persecuted, I have no doubt, but it would be
desirable that the men belonging to it should be united, _sensible_,
and moderate....




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

RAMSGATE, _14th November 1836._

... What you say to me relative to Church matters I quite comprehend,
and always am very thankful for advice from you.

I am reading away famously. I like Mrs. Hutchinson's Life of her
husband[13] only _comme cela_; she is so dreadfully violent. She and
Clarendon are so totally opposite, that it is quite absurd, and I only
believe the _juste milieu_....

Your speech interested me very much; it is very fine indeed; you wrote
it yourself, did you not?

Belgium is indeed the happiest country in the world, and it is _all,
all_ owing to your _great care_ and _kindness_. "Nous étions des
enfans perdus," General Goblet[14] said to me at Claremont, "quand le
Roi est venu nous sauver." And so it is....

Pray, dear Uncle, say everything most kind from me to Ernest and
Albert, and believe me, always, your affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA.

Pray, dear Uncle, is the report of the King of Naples' marriage to the
Archduchess Theresa true? I hear the king has behaved uncommonly
well at Naples during the cholera panic. I enclose the measure of my
finger.

    [Footnote 13: The regicide, Colonel Hutchinson's, fame rests
    more on his wife's commemoration of him than on his own
    exploits. She was the daughter of Sir Allen Apsley, Lieutenant
    of the Tower of London, and highly educated. Between 1664 and
    1671 she wrote the biography of her husband, first published
    in 1806. "The figure of Colonel Hutchinson," says J. R.
    Green, "stands out from his wife's canvas with the grace and
    tenderness of a portrait by Van Dyck."]

    [Footnote 14: The Belgian General, Albert Joseph Goblet. Count
    d'Alviella.]




[Pageheading: DEATH OF CHARLES X]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _18th November 1836._

... Poor Charles X. is dead, it is said of the cholera. I regret
him; few people were ever kinder to me than the good old man. He was
blinded by certain absolute ideas, but a good man, and deserving to
be loved. History will state that Louis XVIII. was a most liberal
monarch, reigning with great mildness and justice to his end, but that
his brother, from his despotic and harsh disposition, upset all
the other had done, and lost the throne. Louis XVIII. was a clever,
hard-hearted man, shackled by no principle, very proud and false.
Charles X. an honest man, a kind friend, an honourable master, sincere
in his opinions, and inclined to do everything that is right. That
teaches us what we ought to believe in history as it is compiled
according to ostensible events and results known to the generality of
people. Memoirs are much more instructive, if written honestly and not
purposely fabricated, as it happens too often nowadays, particularly
at Paris.... I shall not fail to read the books you so kindly
recommend. I join you a small copy of our very liberal Constitution,
hitherto conscientiously executed--no easy matter. You may communicate
it to your Mother; it is the best answer to an infamous Radical or
Tory-Radical paper, the _Constitutional_, which seems determined to
run down the Coburg family. I don't understand the meaning of it;
the only happiness poor Charlotte knew was during her short wedded
existence, and there was but one voice on that subject, that we
offered a bright prospect to the nation. Since that period I have
(though been abused, and vilified merely for drawing an income which
was the consequence of a Treaty ratified by both Houses of Parliament,
and that without one dissenting voice, a thing not very likely to
happen again) done everything to see England prosperous and powerful.
I have spared her, in 1831, much trouble and expense, as _without
my coming here very serious complications, war and all the expensive
operations connected with it_, must have taken place. I give the whole
of my income, without the reservation of a farthing, to the country; I
preserve unity on the Continent, have frequently prevented mischief at
Paris, and to thank me for all that, I get the most scurrilous abuse,
in which the good people from _constant practice so much excel_....
The conclusion of all this--and that by people whose very existence
in political life may be but of a few years' standing--is scurrilous
abuse of the Coburg family. I should like to know what harm the Coburg
family has done to England? But enough of this. Your principle is very
good; one must not mind what newspapers say. Their power is a fiction
of the worst description, and their efforts marked by the worst faith
and the greatest untruths. If all the Editors of the papers in the
countries where the liberty of the press exists were to be assembled,
we should have a _crew_ to which you would _not_ confide a dog that
you would value, still less your honour and reputation....




[Pageheading: REVOLUTION AT LISBON]

[Pageheading: THE PRINCESS'S NAME]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_21st November 1836._

MY MOST DEARLY BELOVED UNCLE,--You cannot imagine how happy you have
made me by your very dear, kind, long, and interesting letter of the
18th, which I received yesterday morning, and for which I beg you
to accept my _very warmest_ and best thanks. You know, I think, my
dearest Uncle, that _no_ creature on earth _loves_ you _more_ dearly,
or has a higher sense of admiration for you, than I have. Independent
of all that you have done--which I never, never can be grateful enough
for--my love for you exceeds all that words can express; it is innate
in me, for from my earliest years the name of _Uncle_ was the dearest
I knew, the word _Uncle_, _alone_, meant no other but you!

Your letter is so interesting and instructive that I could read it
over and over again. I hope, dear Uncle, you will in process of time
give me the _aperçu_ you mention, which would be so very interesting
for me.

I cannot tell you how distressed I was by the late unfortunate
_contre-révolution manquée_ at Lisbon,[15] and how sorry I was to see
by the letter you wrote me, that you were still unaware of it on the
18th. Mamma received a letter from Lord Palmerston yesterday morning,
which she has sent you, and which is consolatory, I think. He speaks
in the highest terms of our beloved Ferdinand, which proves that he
becomes daily more and more worthy of his arduous situation, and says
that the Queen's situation "is better than it was," less bad than it
might have been "after such an affair," and not so good as it would
have been had poor Donna Maria waited patiently till all was ripe for
action. Dietz[16] wrote Mamma a most desponding letter, so much so,
that had we not got Lord Palmerston's letter we must have thought
all, all was over.[17] I hope, dear Uncle, you will tell _me_ _your_
feeling about the whole, which will only satisfy me; no one else
could, for I take an interest in Ferdinand's welfare as though he were
my brother.

Allow me, dearest Uncle, to say a few words respecting my _name_, to
which you allude. You are aware, I believe, that about a year after
the accession of the _present_ King there was a desire to change my
favourite and dear name _Victoria_ to that of _Charlotte_, also _most
dear_, to which the King willingly consented. On its being told me, I
said nothing, though I felt grieved beyond measure at the thought of
any change. Not long after this, Lord Grey, and also the Archbishop of
Canterbury, acquainted Mamma that the country, having been accustomed
to hear me called Victoria, had become used to it, _enfin_, _liked
it_, and therefore, to my great delight, the idea of a change was
given up.[18]

I was sure the death of old Charles X. would strike you....

I thank you much for the _Constitution de la Belgique_. Those attacks
on you are infamous, but must not be minded; they are the language
of a _few jealous_, _envious_ people. _En revanche_, I enclose a
paragraph from a speech of O'Connell's[19] I think worth your reading.

Pray, dearest Uncle, say everything most kind to my beloved and
dearest Aunt, and thank her in my name for her kind letter, which I
shall answer on Friday. I am happy she and the dear little man are
well.

Believe me, always, your most devoted and affectionately attached
Niece,

VICTORIA.

    [Footnote 15: Prince Ferdinand was appointed
    Commander-in-Chief of the Portuguese army on the advice of
    the Duc de Terceira, then Prime Minister. The appointment was
    highly unpopular; riots broke out, the army mutinied, and rose
    against the authorities, with the result that the Queen of
    Portugal was compelled to accept the Radical Constitution of
    1820, in the place of Dom Pedro's constitutional Charter
    of 1826. Later in the year the Queen, assisted by Palmella,
    Terceira, and Saldanha, made a counter-move, believing that
    the people of Lisbon would support her, and proposed to
    dismiss her Ministers; she had, however, been misled as to the
    popular aid forthcoming, and had to give up the struggle, Sá
    da Bandeira becoming Prime Minister. The Queen, virtually a
    captive, had to accede to the revolutionary requirements.]

    [Footnote 16: Dietz was a former Governor of Prince Ferdinand,
    who accompanied him to Portugal on his marriage with Donna
    Maria, and took a considerable part in political affairs.]

    [Footnote 17: A former Minister of the Interior was killed by
    the National Guards, who threatened to march on Belem, where
    the Queen was; she had to apply to the British Marines for
    protection.]

    [Footnote 18: In the course of the debate (3rd August 1831)
    on Lord Althorp's proposition to add £10,000 a year to the
    Duchess of Kent's income, Sir M. W. Ridley suggested changing
    the Princess's name to Elizabeth, as being "more accordant
    to the feelings of the people," saying that he had heard the
    subject "frequently and seriously argued." Hunt, the Radical,
    who opposed the grant, saw no objection to the change, and
    Lord Althorp thought the matter of no particular consequence.
    The Princess's own feelings, and those of her mother, do not
    seem to have been considered. See _Hansard_, 3rd series, vol.
    v. 591, 654 _et seq._]

    [Footnote 19: Probably that on the Irish Church Question at
    the General (formerly "Catholic") Association, Dublin.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _5th December 1836._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--... I have begun since a few days Lord Clive's
Life, by Sir John Malcolm,[20] which is very interesting, as it gives
much insight into the affairs of India, over parts of which, I fear,
it would be well to throw a _veil_. I am reading it by myself, _et je
vous le recommande_....

    [Footnote 20: The book reviewed by Macaulay, who spoke of
    Sir John Malcolm as one whose "love passes the love of
    biographers, and who can see nothing but wisdom and justice in
    the actions of his idol."]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER VI


The closing months of the reign of William IV. were not marked by any
stirring events at home. The Conservative opposition to the Melbourne
Ministry was strengthened before the meeting of Parliament by a great
speech by Sir Robert Peel at Glasgow, and Lord Brougham later on
emerged from his retirement to become the able and venomous critic of
his former friends. The Government failed to carry important measures
on Church Rates and Irish Municipal Corporations, while the Radical
group pressed persistently their favourite motions in support of
the Ballot, and against the Property qualification of members,
Primogeniture, the Septennial Act, the Bishops' seats and Proxy Voting
in the House of Lords. The Ministry was saved from shipwreck by the
demise of the Crown and by the accession of the Princess Victoria,
who, on attaining her legal majority a month earlier, had received
marked signs of enthusiastic popular favour.

The General Election in the Autumn did not materially affect the
position of parties, the Radicals losing and O'Connell gaining
seats; but the prestige of Lord Melbourne was increased by the unique
position he now held in reference to the Sovereign. Parliament was
opened in person by the Queen on 20th November, and the Civil List
dealt with, the amount allocated being £385,000 as against £510,000 in
the late reign (of which £75,000, formerly paid in pensions, was now
struck off, and other arrangements made).

For some time past the state of Canada had caused grave anxiety. By
an Act of 1791, it had been divided into Upper and Lower Canada, each
with a Governor, Council, and House of Representatives, Lower Canada
being in the main French, while Upper Canada was occupied by British
settlers. Friction first arose in the former, between the nominee
Council and the popular Assembly, the Assembly declining to pay the
salaries of officials whom they had censured, but whom the Executive
had retained in their posts. Mr Papineau, who had been Speaker of
the Assembly, was leader in the popular movement. Lord Gosford, the
Governor of Lower Canada, dismissed some Militia officers who had
taken part in political demonstrations, and warrants were issued for
the apprehension of certain members of the Assembly, on the charge
of high treason: within a short time the discontented party broke out
into rebellion. The course which events would take in Upper Canada
was for a time doubtful. Sir Francis Head, the Governor, placed his
regular troops at the service of Lord Gosford, preferring to rely on
the militia. This unusual action was successful, but was not approved
by the Colonial Office. The state of affairs became very alarming at
the close of the year, when it was announced in Parliament that Lord
Gosford had resigned and that Sir John Colborne (afterwards Lord
Seaton) had been appointed to succeed him.

In France the confederates of Louis Napoleon in the Strasburg outbreak
were tried and acquitted; a treaty was concluded at Tafna with
Abd-el-Kader, but negotiations for a similar agreement with Achmet Bey
were less successful, and operations were continued against Constantin
with successful results, the town being carried by an assault on 13th
October, with some loss of officers and men on the French side.

Affairs continued unsettled in the Peninsula. In Spain General Evans
was defeated near San Sebastian, but afterwards, in conjunction with
Lord John Hay, captured Irun, the frontier town. Don Carlos
meanwhile marched on Madrid, but was encountered by Espartero,
Commander-in-Chief of the Christinos, who was Prime Minister for a
brief period during the year. The British legion was dissolved, and
Evans returned to England.

In Portugal the English were becoming unpopular for their supposed
intervention: Ferdinand, the Queen's consort, who was naturally
believed to be in harmony with the British Cabinet, acted tactlessly
in accepting the Commandership-in-Chief, and internal hostilities
continued throughout the year.

In Hanover a reactionary step was taken by King Ernest, who had
succeeded his brother, William IV. of England, on the throne of
Hanover; by letters patent he abrogated the Constitution of 1833, an
action which, imperfect and open to criticism though the Constitution
was, naturally aroused anxiety among the supporters of representative
institutions throughout Europe.




CHAPTER VI

1837




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_16th January 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... We saw Van de Weyer[1] on Tuesday, and his
conversation was most interesting. He praises our dear Ferdinand
most exceedingly, but as for the poor Queen, what he told us does not
redound much to her credit; one good quality, however, she has, which
is her excessive fondness for and real _obedience_ to Ferdinand. She
is unfortunately surrounded by a _camarilla_[2] who poison her ears,
and fetter all her actions; poor soul! she is _much_ to be pitied.
About Lavradio[3] you will also have, I fear, heard but too much.
Honesty and single-heartedness seems to have left Portugal. Van de
Weyer is so clear in all that he says, so sensible, so quiet, so
clever, and, last but not least, so agreeable; I hope we shall soon
see him again. You see, dear Uncle, how much interest I take in
Portugal; but I must say that I think every one who knows dear
Ferdinand, and particularly who loves him as I do, must feel a very
deep interest as to the fate of the unhappy country in which he is
destined to play so prominent and difficult a part.

I have been reading to-day a very clever speech of Sir Robert Peel's
(not a political one) to the University at Glasgow, on the occasion of
his being elected Lord Rector of that college. There is another speech
of his at the dinner at Glasgow which _is political_, but which I have
not yet read....[4]

    [Footnote 1: Sylvain Van de Weyer (b. 1802) was, in 1830,
    Belgian Plenipotentiary at the Conference of London. He
    returned to his own country and became Foreign Minister.
    His exertions contributed greatly to render successful the
    candidature of Prince Leopold for the throne of Belgium. The
    King appointed him Belgian Minister in London, to which post
    he returned in 1851, and held it till 1867. He was treated by
    the Queen until his death in 1874 as a very intimate friend
    and adviser.]

    [Footnote 2: _I.e._ a clique.]

    [Footnote 3: The Portuguese Statesman who had gone to Gotha
    to arrange the Queen's marriage, and was destined to act in a
    similar manner for her son in 1857.]

    [Footnote 4: Sir R. Peel was installed as Lord Rector of
    Glasgow on 11th January, and delivered an address on the
    principles of Education: strong political feeling was
    manifested, groans being given for Lord Melbourne and the
    Ministry. At a civic banquet given in Sir R. Peel's honour, he
    expounded the principles of Conservative Reform.]




[Pageheading: SPAIN AND PORTUGAL]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_23rd January 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... The affairs of the Peninsula are indeed very
distressing,[5] and what you tell me in your letter of the 20th, as
also in the former one, is highly interesting and, alas! but too true.
I trust, not withstanding what you say, I may yet live to see Spain
and Portugal settled. But I greatly fear that the time is far distant.

Do you know Mendizabal?[6] I saw him at our house in 1835. Alava[7]
presented him to us; he is a tall, dark, fine, and clever-looking man.
I remember his being so much struck with my likeness to Donna Maria,
which I was not aware was the case. Pray, dear Uncle, may I ask you a
silly question?--is not the Queen of Spain[8] rather clever? You know
her, and what do you think of her? And do you know what sort of people
are about poor little Queen Isabel?[9] Poor, good Donna Maria! I feel
much for her; her education was one of the worst that could be. As
long as those Ficalhos and Melos remain about her, nothing can be
done. Could they not be got rid of in time?

I was sorry to see that the French Chambers were rather stormy.[10]

I thank you much for the list of the ball of the 18th, which must
have been very splendid. The last ball _I_ was at was our own, and
I concluded that very ball at half-past three in the morning with a
country dance, Albert being my partner.

Pray, dear Uncle, tell both young gentlemen, with my kindest love,
that I _often_ think of that night and of many other pleasant evenings
we passed together. The singing will come all in time. Who is their
singing-master? I wish they had my worthy Lablache. I sing regularly
every evening, as I think it better to do so every day to keep
the voice manageable. Oh, my beloved Uncle, could you join us, how
delightful that would be! How I should delight in singing with you all
our favourite things from _La Gazza_, _Otello_, _Il Barbiere_, etc.,
etc.

The little Cousin[11] must be a little love: oh, could I but see him
and play with him! Pray, dear Uncle, does he know such a thing as that
he has got an Aunt and Cousin on the other side of the water? ...

Pray, dear Uncle, have you read Sir R. Peel's two speeches? I wish you
would, and give me your opinion of them.

    [Footnote 5: Some interesting observations on these events may
    be read in Borrow's _Bible in Spain_.]

    [Footnote 6: Don Juan Alvarez y Mendizabal (1790-1853),
    Spanish politician and financier.]

    [Footnote 7: Miguel Ricardo di Alava (1771-1843), Spanish
    General; he acted as the representative of Spain at Paris, at
    the Court of the Bourbons; he was a great friend of the Duke
    of Wellington, and was with him at his headquarters during the
    Peninsular War.]

    [Footnote 8: The Queen Regent, Christina.]

    [Footnote 9: Then six years old; she died in 1904.]

    [Footnote 10: This was in reference to the trial at Strasburg
    of the confederates of Prince Louis Bonaparte (afterwards
    Napoleon III.) in his abortive attempt to establish a military
    despotism on 30th October. The Prince was permitted to go to
    the United States, being conveyed in a French frigate; the
    other conspirators were acquitted.]

    [Footnote 11: Leopold, born in 1835, afterwards Duke of
    Brabant, the present King of the Belgians.]




[Pageheading: PARLIAMENTARY LANGUAGE]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _30th January 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... I am very sorry that the Portuguese news are
still so very unfavourable; I trust that, in time, things will come
right. The Portuguese are, as you say, a most inconceivable set of
selfish politicians.

Our friend, Mr Hume,[12] made a most violent speech at a dinner given
to him and old George Byng[13] at Drury Lane last week.[14] He called
Sir R. Peel and some other Tories "the cloven foot," which I think
rather strong. I think that _great_ violence and striving such a pity,
on both sides, don't you, dear Uncle? They irritate one another so
uselessly by calling one another fools, blockheads, liars, and so
forth for no purpose. I think violence so bad in everything. They
should imitate you, and be calm, for you have had, God knows! enough
cause for irritation from your _worthy_ Dutch neighbours and others.
You will, I fear, laugh at my _politics_, but I like telling _you_ my
feelings, for you alone can put me right on such subjects.

    [Footnote 12: Joseph Hume, leader of the Radical party, was
    now M.P. for Middlesex.]

    [Footnote 13: George Byng, for many years Member for
    Middlesex, was great-grandson of William Wentworth, Earl of
    Strafford, of the 1711 creation. His younger brother, Sir John
    Byng, the well-known General of the Peninsula and Waterloo,
    was created Earl of Strafford in 1817.]

    [Footnote 14: This was a dinner given by the Middlesex
    reformers to their representatives. Grote also spoke and said
    that the Tories well knew that their dominion rested upon
    everything that was antiquated and corrupt and anti-popular in
    the nation--upon oligarchical predominance in the State, and
    sectarian pride and privileges in the Church.]




[Pageheading: POLITICAL PASSION]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

_3rd February 1837._

MY DEAR CHILD,-- ... I am sorry to see so much violence in England at
this moment; I consider it as the most lamentable circumstance, as it
renders matters so very difficult to settle. Besides, the poor Crown
is more or less the loser in all this, as it generally ends with the
abolition of something or other which might have proved useful for the
carrying on of Government. A rule which you may thus early impress on
your mind is, that people are far from acting generally according to
the dictates of their interests, but oftener in consequence of their
passions, though it may even prove injurious to their interests.
If the Tory part of Parliament could have brought themselves to act
without passion, much in the reform of Parliament might have been
settled much more in conformity with their best interests. I was
authorised, in 1831, to speak in this sense to the Duke of Wellington
by Lord Grey;[15] the effect would have been highly beneficial to
both parties, but passion made it impossible to succeed. This is a
dangerous part of the business, and we must see during the present
session of Parliament if parties are grown wiser. I fear they are not.
The business of the highest in a State is certainly, in my opinion,
to act with great impartiality and a spirit of justice for the good of
all, and not of this or that party.[16]

    [Footnote 15: This refers to the rejection of the Reform Bill
    by the House of Lords in 1831; as a consequence, mobs broke
    the windows of Apsley House, and fired Nottingham Castle.]

    [Footnote 16: On 14th April 1837, Sir Robert Peel wrote to J.
    W. Croker:-- ... "We are, in short, in this state of things.
    All the convictions and inclinations of the Government are
    with their Conservative opponents. Half their actions and all
    their speeches are with the Radicals." (_Croker Papers_, ii.
    306.)]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _6th February 1837._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,-- ... I do not know quite for certain when we leave
this place, but I should think to-day week. You must be pleased, dear
Uncle, I think, for we shall have been _six months_ in the country
next Thursday, as we left town on the 10th of August last, and I am
sure you will stand by me for my having my season fully, as you may
understand that my _Operatic_ and _Terpsichorean_ feelings are pretty
strong, now that the season is returning, and I have been a very good
child, not even _wishing_ to come to town till now. We shall certainly
come here for the Easter week.

Dr Clark[17] arrived here quite happy last night, bringing the news
that Van de Weyer had had the best news from Lisbon he had received
since his return, that all had gone off quietly, that Ferdinand was
daily gaining popularity, and that both he and the Queen had been very
well received at the theatre. The man who threw a stone at Ferdinand
was a Frenchman, whom, it seems, Ferdinand had relieved with money
over and over again. A fine specimen of gratitude!

I hope and trust with you that there will be less violence in
Parliament this year, but much is to be feared.

You will miss my good cousins Ernest and Albert very much, I am sure;
I hope you will instil into them to take enough exercise and not to
study too much.

There were two questions in my last letter but one, which you have
not answered, dear Uncle. They are: 1st, What you think of the Queen
Christina of Spain, what opinion _you_ have of her, as one cannot
believe _reports_? 2nd, If you know what sort of people are about
poor little Queen Isabel, and if she is being _well_ or _ill_ brought
up?...

    [Footnote 17: Afterwards Sir James Clark, and
    Physician-in-Ordinary to the Queen.]



[Pageheading: A DINNER PARTY]

[Pageheading: THE THRONE OF GREECE]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_14th March 1837._

... We had a dinner on Saturday which amused me, as I am very fond
of _pleasant_ society, and we have been for these last three weeks
immured within our old palace, and I longed sadly for some gaiety.
After being so very long in the country I was preparing to go out in
right earnest, whereas I have only been _twice_ to the play since our
return, which is marvellous! However, we are to have another dinner
to-morrow, and are going to the play and Opera. After Easter I trust
I shall make ample amends for all this solitariness. I hope to begin
singing with Lablache shortly after Easter. But to return to last
Saturday's dinner. We had the Archbishop of Dublin,[18] a clever but
singular man, and his lady; Lord Palmerston, with whom I had much
pleasant and amusing conversation after dinner--you know how agreeable
he is; then Lady Cadogan,[19] who enquired much after you and Aunt
Louise; Lord and Lady Rosebery,[20] Mr and Mrs E. Stanley,[21] Lord
Morpeth,[22] Lord Templetown,[23] Sir John Cam Hobhouse,[24] Dr
Lushington,[25] and Mr Woulfe,[26] the Solicitor-General for Ireland,
a Roman Catholic and a very clever man. Lady Cadogan, who is not long
come back from Paris, says that the Duke of Orleans has been going out
very little and is remarkably well. I saw a report in the papers that
he and the Duc de Nemours were coming over here, which I fear is not
true; I wish it was....

There is one thing in your former letter which I must answer, or,
rather, more advert to. You said to me, that if it was not for me, you
would regret Greece very much. Now, I assure you, dearest Uncle, you
ought not to regret it, though there is not a doubt that _Greece_
would be much happier were you there. But I have heard from various
people who have been staying in Greece that they very soon got to like
the Turks much better than the Greeks, who are very untrue, and are
quite banditti-like; then, again, the country, though undoubtedly fine
in parts, is a rocky and barren country, and also you are constantly
exposed to the effects of the Plague, that most dreadful of all evils;
and then, lastly, how very, very far you would be, how cut off from
all those who are dear to you, and how exposed to dangers of all
kinds!

I much grieve that they are quarrelling so much in the French
Chambers.[27] I must now conclude.

    [Footnote 18: Richard Whateley, formerly Principal of St Alban
    Hall, and Drummond Professor of Political Economy at Oxford.]

    [Footnote 19: Louisa Honoria, wife of the third Earl, and
    sister of Joseph, first Lord Wallscourt.]

    [Footnote 20: Archibald, fourth Earl of Rosebery, and Anne
    Margaret, his second wife, daughter of the first Viscount
    Anson.]

    [Footnote 21: Edward Stanley, afterwards fourteenth Earl of
    Derby, thrice Prime Minister.]

    [Footnote 22: Chief Secretary for Ireland.]

    [Footnote 23: John Henry, first Viscount, formerly M.P. for
    Bury St Edmunds.]

    [Footnote 24: Sir John Cam Hobhouse, a Radical, and a friend
    of Byron, at whose wedding he acted as best man; he was
    imprisoned in 1819 for breach of privilege. He was elected
    M.P. for Westminster in 1820 as Burdett's colleague, and
    afterwards for Nottingham and Harwich. Commissioner of Woods
    and Forests (the old Houses of Parliament being burned down
    during his term of office), and later President of Board of
    Control. Created Lord Broughton, 1851.]

    [Footnote 25: Stephen Lushington, advocate in the old
    Ecclesiastical Court, M.P. for Ilchester and the Tower
    Hamlets, and a Judge in the Ecclesiastical and Admiralty
    Courts from 1828 to 1867.]

    [Footnote 26: Stephen Woulfe, M.P. for Carlisle,
    Solicitor-General, and subsequently Attorney-General, for
    Ireland, becoming Chief Baron in 1838.]

    [Footnote 27: On 10th March a heated debate took place in the
    French Chamber on the question of the Queen of the Belgians'
    dowry, a Deputy calling for the production of King Louis
    Philippe's rent-roll, and a complete statement of his income.]



_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _31st March 1837._

MY BELOVED CHILD,--Your dear letter of the 28th gave me the greatest
pleasure. I was sure from your constant affection for us that you
would feel much interested in the event of the 24th. It was a moment
of some anxiety, but all passed over very well. Your Aunt is going
on very well, and the little cousin[28] also. He is smaller than his
brother was, but promises to be like him; the features are much the
same, the shape of the forehead and mouth. The elder Prince was
much interested about his _frère_, and anxious to see him; at first,
however, he declared after a long contemplation, "_pas beau frère!_"
Now he thinks better of him, but makes a very odd little face when he
sees him. The name of the little one will be Philippe Eugène Ferdinand
Marie Clément Baudouin (Baldwin)--a name of the old Counts of
Flanders--Léopold Georges. My Aunt, who is his godmother, wished
he should be called Philippe in honour of his grandfather, and
as Philippe _le Bon_ was one of the most powerful Princes of this
country, I gave him the name with pleasure. Eugène is her own name,
Ferdinand that of Chartres, Marie of the Queen and also of Princess
Marie, Clément of Princess Clémentine; Léopold your Aunt wished, and
George in honour of St George of England and of George IV. Probably I
shall hereafter give to Léopold the title of Duke of Brabant, and to
Philippe that of Count of Flanders, both fine old titles.

    [Footnote 28: Philippe, second son of King Leopold, afterwards
    Count of Flanders. He died in 1905.]




[Pageheading: PRESS COMMENTS]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _7th April 1837._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--... You have been the subject of all sorts of
newspaper paragraphs; your good and sensible way of looking on these
very creditable productions _will be of use to you_. If the press says
useful things, and makes observations which merit attention, there
is no doubt that sometimes, though God knows very rarely, something
useful may be gleaned from them. But when you see its present state,
when the one side says black and the other white, when the opposite
political characters are treated by their respective antagonists as
rogues, fools, blockheads, wretches, and all the other names in which
the English political dictionary is so _very rich_, one stands like
the ass, between two bundles of hay, considerably embarrassed which
ought to be chosen....




[Pageheading: THE PRINCESS'S ESTABLISHMENT]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _11th April 1837._

... As I believe the visit at Windsor is fixed for the 15th, I hope
this letter will arrive in time. Perhaps the King will speak to you
about the necessity of forming you an establishment.[29]... Your
position, having a Mother with whom you very naturally remain, would
render a _complete_ independent establishment perhaps matter of _real_
inconvenience; still something like that which Charlotte had will
become desirable. My idea, if it meets with your approbation, would
be this: The Duchess of Northumberland would remain your first Lady,
Baroness Lehzen would fill a position similar to that of Mrs Campbell,
who had been Charlotte's governess in her younger days, and the
Dean[30] would step into the position which good Dr Short[31] held.
An Equerry, I do not think--as you will not go out without your
Mother--you would require. On the other hand, it may become matter
of examination if you will perhaps like to have some young ladies
attendants in the style of Lady Catherine Jenkinson;[32] should this
be your wish, it would become necessary to make very good choices,
else perhaps you would derive more trouble than comfort from the
arrangement; _cela va sans dire_, that the choice could only be
made by yourself, and that nobody should be given you _against_ your
wishes. Should the King speak to you on the subject, I would at once
express this my wish if you should approve some such arrangement,
and beg him to let _you choose_. Resist mildly but _positively_ any
nomination of a Gentleman other than the Dean; it is highly probable
that any other would be put about you as a spy, and turn out at all
events a great bore, which is better avoided....

I received a messenger from Coburg. I enclose the letters and also
a packet with fans. Ever, my beloved child, your faithfully attached
Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 29: The Princess was to attain her legal majority on
    24th May.]

    [Footnote 30: George Davys, the Princess Victoria's
    instructor, Dean of Chester, and afterwards Bishop of
    Peterborough.]

    [Footnote 31: Thomas Vowler Short, Rector of St George's,
    Bloomsbury, appointed in 1841 Bishop of Sodor and Man.]

    [Footnote 32: Lady Catherine Jenkinson, daughter of the Earl
    of Liverpool, soon after the Queen's accession married Colonel
    Francis Vernon Harcourt.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_12th April 1837._

... What you say about the newspapers is very true and very
flattering. They are indeed a curious compound of truth and untruth. I
am so used to newspaper nonsense and attacks that I do not mind it in
the least....

How happy I am that that beloved Aunt is going on so well and does not
suffer from the cold, as also the _jeune Philippe_. Leopold must
be great fun with his Aunt Marie;[33] does he still say "_pas beau
frère!_" or is he more reconciled to his brother? It is very noble in
the Duc de Nemours to have thus given up his _apanage_;[34] I am sorry
there were such difficulties about it. There is no Ministry formed
yet, I see by the papers.

    [Footnote 33: Princess Marie of Orleans, born 1813, daughter
    of King Louis Philippe, and thus sister to the Queen of the
    Belgians.]

    [Footnote 34: This grant was surrendered in order that due
    provision might be made by the Legislature for the elder
    brother, the Duke of Orleans, on the occasion of his marriage
    with the Princess Hélène of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.]




[Pageheading: THE IRISH MUNICIPAL BILL]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_28th April 1837._

MY MOST BELOVED UNCLE,--.... Sir Henry Hardinge's[35] motion was quite
lost, I am happy to say, and don't you think, dearest Uncle, that
it has almost done good, as it proves that the Tories have lost all
chance of getting in? It was a trial of strength, and the Ministry
have triumphed. I have been reading in the papers, what I suppose you
already know, that it is believed that the Lords _will_ pass the Irish
Corporation Bill;[36] and also that Ministers mean to drop for the
present the question about Church Rates,[37] as the Radicals, being
angry with Ministers relative to the Canada business, would not
support them well.

    [Footnote 35: On a motion for going into supply, Sir H.
    Hardinge proposed an amendment censuring the Government for
    the authorisation of the raising of a force of Volunteers to
    assist the Spanish Government, and for the method in which
    that force had been organised. The amendment was lost by a
    majority of 36, on 19th April.]

    [Footnote 36: The Irish Municipal Bill, to convert
    Corporations of Municipalities into Electoral Councils, was
    introduced in the House of Commons on the 15th of February.
    The Bill was opposed by the Conservatives, but passed the
    House of Commons. In the Lords an amendment of Lyndhurst's
    struck out the constructive clauses, and the Act became, on
    the 18th of May, an Act for the Abolition of Municipalities
    in Ireland. Lord John Russell brought forward a motion to
    reconstruct the Bill. But the Peers declined to pass it, and
    it was postponed.]

    [Footnote 37: As Ministers only obtained a majority of 5 in a
    house of 569, the measure was dropped.]




_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _28th April 1837._

... I hope you occupy yourself with the several great questions which
agitate parties. I think a good mode will be to talk concerning them
sometimes with the Dean. He is a good moderate man, and still well
able to give you sufficient information. From conversation with clever
people, such as dine sometimes with you, much may be very usefully
gathered, and you will do well to attend to this. I am no enemy to
this way of instruction, and have seen people who were sharp enough
to profit wonderfully by it. You hear in this way the opinions of a
variety of persons, and it rests with your own good sense to classify
and appreciate them....




[Pageheading: MINISTERIAL ANXIETY]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_2nd May 1837._

... You may depend upon it that I shall profit by your excellent
advice respecting Politics. Pray, dear Uncle, have you read Lord
Palmerston's speech concerning the Spanish affairs,[38] which he
delivered the night of the division on Sir Henry Hardinge's motion? It
is much admired. The Irish Tithes question came on last night in the
House of Commons,[39] and I am very anxious for the morning papers,
to see what has been done. Lord Melbourne looks remarkably well, Lord
Palmerston not very well, and as for poor little Lord John Russell,
he is only a shadow of himself. It must be dreadfully fagging work for
them; they sit so very late too, for when the Spanish question came
on, the division only took place at four o'clock in the morning, and I
saw them at the Drawing-Room the same day afterwards....

    [Footnote 38: Lord Palmerston indignantly asked whether
    England should continue to fulfil her engagement with the
    Queen of Spain, or disgracefully abandon an ally whom she had
    pledged herself to succour.]

    [Footnote 39: The Irish Tithe Bill, a measure to facilitate
    the collection of tithes, was abandoned because the Tories
    would not consent to any secular appropriation of Church
    revenues, and the Whigs would not consent to the withdrawal
    of their amendments. A remarkable feature in the Bill was a
    proposal that a portion of every clergyman's income should be
    applied to education, as was already prescribed by a former
    Act.]




_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_9th May 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--It was very kind of you to write to me from your
new château; I hardly ventured to hope for my usual letter, and yet I
should have been much disappointed had I not received it. I am sorry
that the house is so bad, but hope you will have found a good position
for a new one....

Pray, dearest Uncle, may I ask such an indiscreet question as, if
Major Stroekens is a clever man; he was so nervous and embarrassed
when he came here, that I could not make him out. He brought me a very
nice letter from Donna Maria.

I am anxiously waiting to hear the issue of the battle between
the Carlists and Christinos, which is, they say, to decide a great
deal.[40]

Now farewell, dearest Uncle. I beg my affectionate love to my dear
Aunt, and my most respectful _hommages_ to the Members of the Family
with you. Believe me, always, your affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA.

Old Pozzo[41] dined here last Wednesday, and he gave me a long, I
must say clever, dissertation about the state of France, during
dinner-time.

    [Footnote 40: After an obstinate investment by the Carlists,
    Espartero had relieved Bilbao on Christmas Day, 1836. The
    Christino commanders then began to concert a combined
    movement on the Carlist lines, which stretched from Irun to
    Villafranca.]

    [Footnote 41: Count Pozzo di Borgo (1764-1842), Russian
    Ambassador. By birth a Corsican and a devoted patriot, he was
    a life-long opponent of Napoleon and his designs. He entered
    the Russian diplomatic service in 1803, and after Waterloo
    became Russian Ambassador in Paris. He was Ambassador in
    London for two years, when his health gave way.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCESS'S ESTABLISHMENT]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _25th May 1837._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--You have had some battles and difficulties of which
I am completely in the dark. The thing I am most curious to learn
is what the King proposed to you concerning your establishment....
I shall reserve my opinion till I am better informed, but by what
I heard I did not approve of it, because I thought it ill-timed.
Stockmar will be able to do much. Two things seem necessary; not to be
fettered by any establishment other than what will be _comfortable
to you_, and then to avoid any breach with your mother. I have
fully instructed Stockmar, and I must say he left me in such good
disposition that I think he will be able to be of great use to you.
The great thing is to act without precipitation and with caution. The
King seems better again. I am very curious to know what he proposed;
you will have it in your power to modify his proposition, as it is
difficult your _approbation_ should be dispensed with; it would be a
great fault in your situation to _submit_ to this.... They seemed to
think the King dying, which does not appear to be the case. Be steady,
my good child, and _not_ put out by _anything_; as long as I live _you
will not want a faithful friend and supporter_....

Here your somewhat curious little soul has at least the outlines of
things....

_26th._--I received yesterday the whole of the papers concerning the
King's propositions.[42] I approve your letter to the King, as it
is amiable and generous, and this in your position will always tell
favourably. I think that if _he_ is well advised he will chiefly
consult _your wishes_. This is the footing on which you must place
matters. It is not worth while to be told that one is in some sort
of age when the consequence is that you are not consulted in what
concerns you most personally. Avoid in future to say much about
your great _youth_ and _inexperience_. Who made the letter? Was it
yourself, or came it from your Mother? You have now the Baron at your
elbow, and even your Mother was most anxious for his arrival. _Speak
sometimes with him_; it is necessary to accustom you to the thing.

About the King's health.[43] I am doubtful what to think. We have
foreseen the case and treated it formerly. The great thing would be to
make no change, to keep Ministers and everything as it is, and to gain
time; in this way _no one is hurt and no amour-propre blessé_.
For this reason I lean to your keeping, to begin with, Sir Herbert
Taylor[44] for your _official_ secretary, though I am not quite
_decided_ on the subject. He knows the manner in which the _daily
business_ is carried on; this is important. I believe him, and have
found him to be an honest man, that would do for State matters; it
would not be required that he should be your _confidential_ adviser.
Now I conclude, and send you this letter through Stockmar. My best
regards to Lehzen. Ever your faithful Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 42: The King had offered the Princess an
    establishment of £10,000 a year, independent of her mother.
    This was accepted, to the great vexation of the Duchess of
    Kent, but the arrangement was not carried into effect.]

    [Footnote 43: King William's health was at this time causing
    much anxiety.]

    [Footnote 44: Private Secretary to King William IV.]




[Pageheading: BIRTHDAY REJOICINGS]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_26th May 1837._

... The demonstrations of affection and kindness from all sides
towards me on my birthday, were most gratifying. The parks and streets
were crowded all day as though something very extraordinary had
happened. Yesterday I received twenty-two Addresses from various
places, all very pretty and loyal; one in particular was very well
written which was presented by Mr. Attwood[45] from the Political
Union at Birmingham.

I am delighted to hear Stockmar is at length arrived; he reached
London on Wednesday, and we shall see him to-day.

How distressed I am that poor dear Ernest[46] has been so ill! Thank
God! that he is now better.

The Spanish affairs have turned out better than you had expected; the
triumphant capture of Irun[47] was a great thing for the Christinos.

The King is much better.

    [Footnote 45: Thomas Attwood founded in 1829 the Birmingham Political
    Union, which helped to pass the Reform Act. Previously he had been
    known for his opposition to the Orders in Council, and the resumption
    of cash payments. Birmingham elected him without opposition in 1832,
    and he sat till 1840.]

    [Footnote 46: Prince Ernest of Saxe-Coburg.]

    [Footnote 47: The frontier town of Spain, near St Sebastian,
    captured, 16th May, by the Christinos, supported by British
    troops.]




[Pageheading: ADVICE AND ENCOURAGEMENT]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

TUILERIES, _7th June 1837._

... The _entrée_[48] last Sunday was something remarkably splendid; we
saw it from the Tuileries, as we had nothing to do with the business
itself, and your Aunt's rank would have clashed with that of the
Duchess of Orleans. The effect of all this on the people of this great
town has been _very great_, and evidently much ground has been solidly
regained. The King, getting out of that sort of confinement in which
it was necessary to keep, has gained much in personal comfort, and
also in a political point of view; because to have a King who cannot
show himself without being shot at, is a state of society which lowers
his authority....

For the present the best plan is to continue to act as you have
done hitherto; to avoid quarrels, but also to stick _firmly to your
resolution when once_ taken. The violence which is sometimes shown is
so well known to you, you know also so well that you have nothing
to fear from these people, that _you must keep up your usual cool
spirit_, whatever may be tried in the House to _teaze you out of it_.
I mean to wait some more detailed accounts of what is going on in
England before I give my opinion on what ought to be done in the case
that the King's disease should take a more fatal turn.

As I told you before, however, when we treated this subject verbally
and in writing, I believe it to be your interest to act very mildly,
_to begin by taking everything as the King leaves it_. By this system
you avoid disappointing those whose hopes may remain unchanged, as
your own choices, as it were, are not yet made. Parties, which at
present are so nearly balanced, remain _in statu quo_, and you gain
time.

I must conclude now this letter. My winding up is, keep your mind
_cool_ and _easy_; be _not alarmed_ at the prospect of becoming
perhaps sooner than you expected Queen; aid will not be wanting, and
the great thing is that you should have some honest people about you
who have your welfare _really at heart_. Stockmar will be in this
respect all we can wish, and we must hope that _useful_ occupation
will prevent his health from suffering. Now once more God bless you.
Ever, my dear child, your faithful Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 48: The entry into Paris of the Duke and Duchess of
    Orleans, who had been married at Fontainebleau on May 30th.]




[Pageheading: THE ACCESSION IMMINENT]


_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _15th June 1837._

MY BELOVED CHILD,--I hope that to-day will not pass over without
bringing me a letter from you. In the meantime I will begin this
epistle, which will go by a messenger of my own to-morrow. In every
letter I shall write to you I mean to repeat to you, as a _fundamental
rule_, _to be courageous, firm and honest, as you have been till now_.
You may count upon my faithful good offices in all difficulties,
and you have at your command Stockmar, whose _judgment_, _heart_, and
_character_ offer all the guarantees we can wish for. I wish nothing
but to see you _happy and prosperous_, and by Sunday I shall probably
write you a long letter, which will enter into details about most
things.

My object is that you should be no one's _tool_, and though young, and
naturally not yet experienced, your good natural sense and the _truth_
of your character will, with faithful and proper advice, get you very
well through the difficulties of your future position, should it be
the will of Providence to take the King from this earthly life. Of his
real position I am still not quite able to judge, there being so much
contradictory in the reports. Be this as it may, the great thing for
you is, not to be hurried into important measures, and to _gain time_.
A new reign is always a time of hope; everybody is disposed to see
something for his own wishes and prospects. The policy of a new
Sovereign must therefore be to act in such a manner as to hurt as
little as possible the _amour-propre_ of people, to let circumstances
and the force of things bring about the disappointments which no human
power could prevent coming sooner or later: that they should come as
_late_ as possible is in your interest. Should anything happen to the
King before I can enter more fully into the necessary details, limit
yourself to _taking kindly_ and in a _friendly_ manner the present
Administration into your service. They are _naturally friendly to your
interests_, _as you are in fact the only possible Sovereign of the
whole family_, with the exception of the Duke of Sussex, they can
_serve_ with _sincerity_ and _attachment_. This is of great importance
to you, as it is by no means the same thing to have people who aid and
assist you with feelings of real attachment, or merely from cold and
calculating motives of political expediency and self-interest.
This being done, no other step should be taken without consulting
seriously. The very time which is necessary to attain this end is
favourable to you, as it is your greatest interest for the _present
moment_ to act most cautiously and to gain as much _time_ as possible.
In high positions it is excessively difficult to _retrace_ a false
move to get out of a mistake; and there exists very rarely, except in
time of war and civil feuds, a necessity for an _immediate_ decision.
Your part must be, to resume once more what I said before, to
remain as long as possible _agreeable_ to all parties, and after the
formation of the Ministry, to be most careful how you take any measure
of importance....




[Pageheading: THE KING'S ILLNESS]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_16th June 1837._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,--... I cannot say how happy I am that the _entrée
publique_ into Paris succeeded so well, and that the dear King was
so well received; I trust he will now at last be rewarded for all the
troubles and anxiety he has had ever since 1830. Lord Palmerston said
that the French say that _l'assassinat est hors de mode_. I hope and
trust in Heaven that this may be the case, and _for ever_!

You know, of course, dear Uncle, how _very ill_ the King is; it
may _all be over_ at _any moment_, and yet _may_ last a few days.
Consequently, we have not been out anywhere in public since Tuesday,
6th, and since Wednesday all my lessons are stopped, as the news may
arrive very suddenly....




_The King of the Belgians to the Princess Victoria._

LAEKEN, _17th June 1837._

MY BELOVED CHILD,--... I shall to-day enter on the subject of what is
to be done when the King ceases to live. The moment you get official
communication of it, you will entrust Lord Melbourne with the office
of retaining the present Administration as your Ministers. You will do
this in that honest and kind way which is quite your own, and say some
kind things on the subject. The fact is that the present Ministers are
those who will serve you personally with the greatest _sincerity_ and,
I trust, attachment. For them, as well as for the Liberals at large,
you are the _only_ Sovereign that offers them _des chances d'existence
et de durée_. With the exception of the Duke of Sussex, there is
no _one_ in the family that offers them anything like what they can
reasonably hope from you, and your immediate successor, with the
mustaches,[49] is enough to frighten them into the most violent
attachment for you.

... The irksome position in which you have lived will have the merit
to have given you the habit of _discretion_ and _prudence_, as in your
position you never can have _too much_ of either. Great measures of
State I hope you will be able to avoid at first. I have already--if
you would read it over, and perhaps let Stockmar see it--written to
you some months ago on the subject of the necessity of maintaining the
influence of conservative principles, and of protecting the Church.
You will do well to keep both objects in view. You will do wisely
by showing yourself attached to the English Protestant Church as it
exists in the State; you are particularly where you are, because you
are a Protestant. I know you are averse to persecution, and you are
right; miss, however, _no opportunity_ to show your sincere feeling
for the existing Church; it is _right_ and _meet_ that you should do
so. I must repeat that you will do well as long as it will be possible
to hurt no one's hopes or prospects. That this will not always, or
very long, be possible is the consequence of the state of parties;
still, one may be frank and honest, and still kind to all. Concerning
foreign policy I shall write on some future occasion. In the meantime
I trust you will protect the two Queens in the Peninsula, who are
miserably ill off. I am sure, with your good sense you will not find
it difficult to judge questions yourself. I cannot too much recommend
this, as it will then become a habit, and even an amusement to you.
Cultivate always a genuine feeling of right and wrong, and be very
true and honourable in your dealings; this gives great strength. I
have taken into consideration the advantage or disadvantage of my
coming over to you _immediately_. The result of my _examen_ is that I
think it better to visit you later. If, however, you wanted me at any
time, I should come in a moment. People might fancy I came to enslave
you, while I glory in the contrary; and, thirdly, that they might be
jealous, or _affect_ it at least, of my coming, as if I thought of
ruling the realm for _purposes of my own_....

I am now at the end, I think, of what I had to say. May Heaven bless
you and keep up your spirits. Ever, my beloved child, your faithful
Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.

Pardon the hurry in which this letter was written.

    [Footnote 49: The Duke of Cumberland.]




[Pageheading: THE KING'S CONDITION HOPELESS]


_The Princess Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_19th June 1837._

MY DEARLY BELOVED UNCLE,--Your _kind_ and _dear_ letter, containing
_most wholesome_, _prudent_, _sound_ and _excellent_ advice, was given
me by our _good_ and _invaluable honest_ friend, Stockmar, and I beg
you to accept my best thanks for it. Before I say anything else, let
me tell you how happy and thankful I am to have Stockmar here; he
has _been_, and _is_, of the _greatest_ possible use, and be assured,
dearest Uncle, that he possesses my _most entire confidence_!

The King's state, I may fairly say, is _hopeless_; he may _perhaps_
linger a few days, but he cannot recover _ultimately_. Yesterday the
physicians declared he could not live till the morning, but to-day he
is a little better; the great fear is his _excessive_ weakness and
no _pulse_ at all. Poor old man! I feel sorry for him; he was always
personally kind to me, and I should be ungrateful and devoid of
feeling if I did not remember this.

I look forward to the event which it seems is likely to occur soon,
with calmness and quietness; I am not alarmed at it, and yet I do
not suppose myself quite equal to all; I trust, however, that with
_good-will_, _honesty_, and _courage_ I shall not, at all events,
_fail_. Your advice is most excellent, and you may depend upon it I
shall make use of it, and follow it, as also what Stockmar says. I
_never showed_ myself, _openly_, to belong to _any party_, and I _do
not_ belong to any party. The Administration will undoubtedly be well
received by me, the more so as I have _real_ confidence in them, and
in particular in Lord Melbourne, who is a straightforward, honest,
clever and good man.

I need not add much more, dearest Uncle, but that I trust that the
all-powerful Being who has so long watched over my destinies will
guide and support me, in whatever situation and station it may please
Him to place me!...




[Pageheading: THE ACCESSION]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _20th June 1837._

Viscount Melbourne[50] presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
being aware that your Majesty has already received the melancholy
intelligence of the death of his late Majesty, will do himself the
honour of waiting upon your Majesty a little before nine this morning.
Viscount Melbourne has requested the Marquis of Lansdowne[51] to
name eleven as the hour for the meeting of the Council at Kensington
Palace.

    [Footnote 50: Lord Melbourne, so far as can be augured from
    his handwriting, which is extremely difficult to decipher,
    appears always to have written his own name _Melburne_. But
    it is not the correct spelling, and no one else seems to have
    employed it.]

    [Footnote 51: Lord President of the Council; formerly for a
    brief period (1806-7) Chancellor of the Exchequer.]



_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_20th June 1837_ (_half-past eight_ A.M.).

DEAREST, MOST BELOVED UNCLE,--Two words only, to tell you that my poor
Uncle, the King, expired this morning at twelve minutes past two.
The melancholy news were brought to me by Lord Conyngham[52] and the
Archbishop of Canterbury[53] at six. I expect Lord Melbourne almost
immediately, and hold a Council at eleven. Ever, my beloved Uncle,
your devoted and attached Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 52: Francis Nathaniel, second Marquis of Conyngham,
    had been M.P. for Westbury and Donegal, and was now Lord
    Chamberlain.]

    [Footnote 53: William Howley (1766-1848), Bishop of London
    1813-1828, Primate 1828-1848.]



_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _20th June 1837._

MY DEAREST NIECE ... I feel most grateful for your kind letter full of
sympathy with my irreparable loss, and thank you with all my heart for
your feeling expressions on this melancholy occasion. I am, as you
may suppose, deeply affected by all the sad scenes I have gone through
lately; but I have the great comfort to dwell upon the recollection of
the perfect resignation, piety, and patience with which the dear King
bore his trials and sufferings, and the truly Christian-like manner of
his death.

Excuse my writing more at present, my heart is overwhelmed and my
head aches very much. Accept the assurance of my most affectionate
devotion, and allow me to consider myself always as your Majesty's
most affectionate Friend, Aunt, and Subject,

ADELAIDE.




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S JOURNAL]

[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S FIRST COUNCIL]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Tuesday, 20th June 1837._

I was awoke at 6 o'clock by Mamma, who told me that the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Lord Conyngham were here, and wished to see me. I got
out of bed and went into my sitting-room (only in my dressing-gown)
and _alone_, and saw them. Lord Conyngham (the Lord Chamberlain)
then acquainted me that my poor Uncle, the King, was no more, and had
expired at 12 minutes past 2 this morning, and consequently that I
am _Queen_. Lord Conyngham knelt down and kissed my hand, at the same
time delivering to me the official announcement of the poor King's
demise. The Archbishop then told me that the Queen was desirous that
he should come and tell me the details of the last moments of my poor
good Uncle; he said that he had directed his mind to religion, and had
died in a perfectly happy, quiet state of mind, and was quite prepared
for his death. He added that the King's sufferings at the last were
not very great but that there was a good deal of uneasiness. Lord
Conyngham, whom I charged to express my feelings of condolence and
sorrow to the poor Queen, returned directly to Windsor. I then went to
my room and dressed.

Since it has pleased Providence to place me in this station, I shall
do my utmost to fulfil my duty towards my country; I am very young
and perhaps in many, though not in all things, inexperienced, but I am
sure that very few have more real goodwill and more real desire to do
what is fit and right than I have.

Breakfasted, during which time good, faithful Stockmar came and talked
to me. Wrote a letter to dear Uncle Leopold and a few words to dear
good Feodore. Received a letter from Lord Melbourne in which he said
he would wait upon me at a little before 9. At 9 came Lord Melbourne,
whom I saw in my room, and of _course quite alone_, as I shall
_always_ do all my Ministers. He kissed my hand, and I then acquainted
him that it had long been my intention to retain him and the rest of
the present Ministry at the head of affairs, and that it could not be
in better hands than his. He again then kissed my hand. He then read
to me the Declaration which I was to read to the Council, which he
wrote himself, and which is a very fine one. I then talked with him
some little time longer, after which he left me. He was in full
dress. I like him very much, and feel confidence in him. He is a very
straightforward, honest, clever and good man. I then wrote a letter to
the Queen. At about 11 Lord Melbourne came again to me, and spoke to
me upon various subjects. At about half-past 11 I went downstairs and
held a Council in the red saloon.

I went in of course quite alone and remained seated the whole time.
My two Uncles, the Dukes of Cumberland and Sussex, and Lord Melbourne
conducted me. The Declaration, the various forms, the swearing in of
the Privy Councillors, of which there were a great number present,
and the reception of some of the Lords of the Council, previous to the
Council, in an adjacent room (likewise alone) I subjoin here. I was
_not_ at all nervous and had the satisfaction of hearing that people
were satisfied with what I had done and how I had done it. Received
after this, audiences of Lord Melbourne, Lord John Russell, Lord
Albemarle (Master of the Horse), and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
all in my room and alone. Saw Stockmar. Saw Clark, whom I named my
physician. Saw Mary. Wrote to Uncle Ernest. Saw Ernest Hohenlohe, who
brought me a kind and very feeling letter from the poor Queen. I feel
very much for her, and really feel that the poor good King was always
so kind personally to me, that I should be ungrateful were I not
to recollect it and feel grieved at his death. The poor Queen is
wonderfully composed now, I hear.

Wrote my journal. Took my dinner upstairs alone. Went downstairs.
Saw Stockmar. At about twenty minutes to 9 came Lord Melbourne and
remained till near 10. I had a very important and a very _comfortable_
conversation with him. Each time I see him I feel more confidence in
him; I find him very kind in his manner too. Saw Stockmar. Went down
and said good-night to Mamma, etc. My _dear_ Lehzen will _always_
remain with me as my friend, but will take no situation about me, and
I think she is right.




[Pageheading: THE HOUSE OF COMMONS]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _22nd June 1837._

Lord John Russell[54] presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
has the honour to report that he presented to the House of Commons
this day your Majesty's gracious Message.

He then moved an Address of Condolence and Congratulation, which
was seconded by Sir Robert Peel. Sir Robert Peel very properly took
occasion to speak in terms of high admiration of the deportment of
your Majesty before the Privy Council on Tuesday. The Address was
agreed to without a dissentient voice, and your Majesty may rest
assured that the House of Commons is animated by a feeling of loyalty
to the Throne, and of devotion to your Majesty.

[Footnote 54: Writing as Leader of the House of Commons.]




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

(Undated--_22nd or 23rd June 1837._)

MY DEAREST NIECE,--I am most grateful for your amiable letter and
truly kind offer to come and see me next week. Any day convenient to
your Majesty will be agreeable to me, the sooner the better, for I am
equally anxious to see you again, and to express to you in person all
that I feel for you at this trying moment. If Monday will suit you
I shall be ready to receive you and your dear Mother on that day. My
prayers are with you and my blessing follows you in all you have to go
through. My health is as well as it can be after the great exertions
I have suffered, and I try to keep up under my heavy trial and deep
affliction.

My best wishes attend you, my dearest Niece, and I am for ever your
Majesty's most affectionate and faithful Friend, Aunt and Subject,

ADELAIDE.




[Pageheading: CONGRATULATIONS]


_The King of the French to Queen Victoria._

PARIS, _le 23 Juin 1837._

MADAME MA S[OE]UR,--J'ai appris avec une vive peine la perte que votre
Majesté vient de faire dans la personne de son très cher et bien aimé
Oncle le Roi Guillaume IV. d'auguste et vénérable mémoire. La vive et
sincère amitié que je porte à votre Majesté, et à ceux qui lui sont
chers, les liens de parenté qui rapprochent nos deux familles par
l'alliance de ma fille chérie avec le Roi des Belges votre Oncle bien
aimé, et enfin le souvenir qui m'est toujours bien cher de la tendre
amitié qui m'attachait au feu Prince votre Père, depuis que nous
nous étions vus en Amérique, il y a déjà trente-huit ans,[55] me
déterminent à ne pas attendre les formalités d'usage, pour offrir
à votre Majesté mes félicitations sur son avènement au Trône de la
Grande-Bretagne. Il m'est doux de penser que l'heureuse direction que
la Princesse votre excellente et bien aimée Mère a si sagement donnée
à votre jeune âge, vous met à portée de supporter dignement le grand
fardeau qui vous est échu. Je fais les v[oe]ux les plus sincères pour
que la Providence bénisse votre Règne, et qu'il soit une époque de
bonheur et de prospérité pour les peuples que vous êtes appelée a
gouverner. Puissiez-vous aussi jouir longtemps de tout le bonheur
personnel que je vous souhaite du fond de mon c[oe]ur. Je serai
toujours bien empressé de manifester à votre Majesté tous les
sentiments d'attachement et d'affection que je lui porte. Qu'elle
me permette d'y ajouter l'expression de la haute estime et de
l'inviolable amitié avec lesquelles je ne cesserai d'être, Madame ma
S[oe]ur, de votre Majesté Le Bon Frère,

LOUIS PHILIPPE R.

    [Footnote 55: In 1799 the Duke of Kent was Commander-in-Chief
    in British North America.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _23rd June 1837._

MY BELOVED CHILD,--Your new dignities will not change or increase
my old affection for you; may Heaven assist you, and may I have the
_happiness of being able to be of use to you_, and to contribute to
those successes in your new career for which I am so anxious. Your
letter of the 19th, written very shortly before the important event
took place, gave me _great satisfaction_; it showed me a temper of
mind well calculated for the occasion. To see the difficulties of the
task without shrinking from them or feeling alarm, and to meet them
with courage, is the way to succeed. I have often seen that the
_confidence_ of success has been the _cause of the success itself_,
and you will do well to _preserve_ that sentiment.

I have been most happy to learn that the swearing in of the Council
passed so well. The Declaration in the newspapers I find simple and
appropriate. The translation in the papers says, "_J'ai été élevés en
Angleterre._" 1. I should advise to say as often as possible that you
are _born_ in England. George III. _gloried_ in this, and as _none_
of your cousins are born in England, it is your interest _de faire
reporter cela fortement_. 2. You never can say too much in praise of
your country and its inhabitants. Two nations in Europe are really
almost ridiculous in their own exaggerated praises of themselves;
these are the English and the French. Your being very national is
highly important, and as you happen to be born in England and never to
have left it a moment,[56] it would be odd enough if people tried
to make out the contrary. 3. The Established Church I also recommend
strongly; you cannot, without _pledging_ yourself to anything
_particular_, _say too much on the subject_. 4. Before you decide
on anything important I should be glad if you would consult me; this
would also have the advantage of giving you time. In politics most
measures will come in time within a certain number of days; to retrace
or back out of a measure is on the contrary extremely _difficult_, and
almost always _injurious_ to the highest authority.

    [Footnote 56: The Duke and Duchess of Kent were settled at
    Amorbach, in Leiningen, till a short time before the birth of
    their child, when they came to Kensington.]




[Pageheading: THE MINISTERS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_25th June 1837._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,--Though I have an _immense_ deal of _business_
to do, I shall write you a few lines to thank you for your kind and
useful letter of the 23rd, which I have just received. _Your_ advice
is always of the _greatest importance_ to me.

Respecting Claremont, Stockmar will be able to explain to you the
_total_ impossibility of my being out of London, as I must see my
Ministers _every_ day. I am _very_ well, sleep well, and drive every
evening in the country; it is so hot that walking is out of the
question. Before I go further let me pause to tell you how fortunate I
am to have at the head of the Government a man like Lord Melbourne.
I have seen him now every day, with the exception of Friday, and the
more I see him, the more confidence I have in him; he is not only a
clever statesman and an honest man, but a good and a kind-hearted man,
whose aim is to do his duty for his country and not for a _party_. He
is of the greatest use to me both politically and privately.

I have seen almost all my other Ministers, and do regular, hard,
but to _me delightful_, work with them. It is to me the _greatest
pleasure_ to do my duty for my country and my people, and no fatigue,
however great, will be burdensome to me if it is for the welfare of
the nation. Stockmar will tell you all these things. I have reason
to be highly pleased with all my Ministers, and hope to God that
the Elections[57] may be favourable, as I well know that the present
Ministry is the best and most moderate we can have.

Do not, my dearly beloved Uncle, fear for my health; I shall take
_good_ care of it. I beg your advice on the enclosed paper.

Ever your devoted and grateful Niece and affectionate _Child_,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 57: At that time rendered necessary by the demise of
    the Crown.]




[Pageheading: DELIBERATION ADVISED]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _27th June 1837._

MY DEAR CHILD,--... Now I must touch on another subject which is of
vital importance for you and your comfort, viz. the habits of business
which you will contract now. The best plan is to devote certain hours
to it; if you do that, you will get through it with great ease. I
think you would do well to tell your Ministers that for the present
you would be ready to receive those who should wish to see you between
the hours of eleven and half-past one. This will not plague you much,
and will be sufficient in most cases for the usual business that is to
be transacted.

I shall add to this a piece of advice. Whenever a question is of some
importance, it should not be decided on the day when it is submitted
to you. Whenever it is not an urgent one, I make it a rule not to let
any question be forced upon my _immediate_ decision; it is really not
doing oneself justice _de décider des questions sur le pouce_. And
even when in my mind I am disposed to accede, still I always keep the
papers with me some little time before I return them. The best mode
for you will be, that each Minister should bring his box with him,
and when he submits to you the papers, _explain them to you_. Then you
will keep the papers, either to think yourself upon it or to consult
somebody, and either return them the next time you see the Minister
to whom they belong, or send them to him. Good habits formed _now_ may
for ever afterwards be kept up, and will become so natural to you that
you will not find them at all fatiguing.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

KENSINGTON PALACE, _29th June 1837._

The Queen has received Lord Melbourne's communication, and thinks,
as Prince Ernest of Hesse goes to the funeral, it would be proper the
Prince of Leiningen should do just the same. The Queen requests that
Lord Melbourne will be so good as to take care that the Prince of
Leiningen is informed as to the proper dress he ought to wear on the
occasion.

Lord Albemarle mentioned yesterday to the Queen, that all the ladies'
saddle-horses, including the Queen-Dowager's own favourite horses,
belonged to the Queen; but it strikes her that it would be well if the
Queen was to give the Queen-Dowager the choice of two or three of her
own horses, and that she might keep them. The Queen would wish Lord
Melbourne to give her his opinion on this subject....




[Pageheading: STOCKMAR]

[Pageheading: SUBJECTS FOR STUDY]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _30th June 1837._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--... I am glad to see that you are so much pleased
with Lord Melbourne. I believe him to be as you think him. His
character is a guarantee which is valuable, and remember that
_cleverness_ and _talent_, _without an honest heart and character_,
_will never do for your Minister_. I shall name nobody, but what I
said just now applies to some people you have recently seen.

I am so happy that you enter into the important affairs which
Providence has entrusted to you with so much interest and spirit; if
you continue you will be _sure of success_, and your own conscience
will give you the most delightful and satisfactory feelings. To be
_National_ is the _great thing_, and I was sure you would agree with
what I said repeatedly to you on this _vital subject_, and you will be
certain in this way of the _love_ of the nation you govern.

I recommend to your kind attention what Stockmar will think it his
duty to tell you; he will never press anything, never plague you with
anything, without the thorough conviction that it is indispensable
for your welfare. I can guarantee his independence of mind and
disinterestedness; nothing makes an impression upon him but what his
experience makes him feel to be of importance for you. I am delighted
with your plan. You will recollect that I pressed upon you repeatedly
how necessary it was for you to continue your studies on a more
_extended_ scale, more appropriate to the station you were destined
once to fill. No one is better qualified to direct those studies for
the next few years than Stockmar, few people possess more general
information, and very, very few have been like him educated, as it
were, by fate itself since 1816. There is no branch of information in
which he may not prove useful--

(1) History, considered in a practical and philosophical way; (2)
International Law and everything connected with it; (3) Political
Economy, an important branch nowadays; (4) Classic studies; (5)
_belles lettres_ in general; (6) Physical Science in all its branches,
etc., etc.--the list would be very long if I were to enumerate it all.
The _sooner_ you do this the better; in all countries and at all times
men like Stockmar have filled similar situations, even in the most
bigoted and jealous countries, such as Spain, Austria, etc. You will
have him in this case _constantly near you without_ anybody having the
right of finding fault with it, and to be useful to you he should be
near you. Stockmar would have the _immense_ advantage, for so young
a Queen, to be a _living_ dictionary of all matters scientific and
politic that happened these thirty years, which to you is of the
greatest importance, because you _must study_ the political history of
at least the last thirty-seven years _more particularly_. I had begun
something of the sort with you, even so far back as George II.; you
will do well to go through the reign of George III., and to follow the
various circumstances which brought on finally the present state of
affairs....

My letter grows too long, and you will not have time to read it; I
will therefore come to an end, remaining ever, my beloved Victoria,
your faithfully attached Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: SPANISH AFFAIRS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_3rd July 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I had the happiness of receiving your kind letter
of 30th June yesterday, and hasten to thank you for it. Your dear and
kind letters, full of kind and excellent advice, will always be of the
greatest use to me, and will always be my delight. You may depend
upon it that I shall profit by your advice, as I have already so often
done.

I was sure you would be of my opinion relative to Lord Melbourne.
Indeed, dearest Uncle, nothing is to be done without a good heart and
an honest mind; I have, alas! seen so much of bad hearts and dishonest
and _double_ minds, that I know how to value and appreciate _real
worth_.

All is going on well at present, and the elections promise to be
favourable. God grant they may be so! I had a very long and highly
interesting conversation with Palmerston on Saturday, about Turkey,
Russia, etc., etc. I trust something may be done for my sister Queens.
They have got a Constitution in Spain at length, and the Cortes have
done very well. We hope also to conclude a treaty of commerce with the
Spaniards shortly, which would be an immense thing.

If you could get my kind and dear friend Louis Philippe, whom I do so
respect, and for whom I have a great affection, to do something for
poor Spain, it would be of great use.

I am quite _penetrated_ by the King's kindness in sending good old
General Baudrand[58] and the Duc d'Elchingen[59] over to compliment
me; Baudrand did it very well, and with much good feeling. In
Portugal, affairs look very black, I grieve to say. They have
no money, and the _Chartists_ want to bring about another
counter-revolution, which would be fatal to the poor Queen's
interests, I fear.

That you approve my plan about Stockmar I am delighted to hear.

I hope to go into Buckingham Palace very shortly after the funeral.

Now, dearest Uncle, I must invite you _en forme_. I should be most
_delighted_ if you, dearest Aunt Louise, and Leopold (_j'insiste_)
could come about the _middle_ or _end_ of _August_. Then I should beg
you would stay a little longer than usual, a fortnight at _least_. You
could bring as many gentlemen, ladies, _bonnes_, etc., etc., as you
pleased, and I should be _too_ happy and proud to have you under _my
own_ roof....

    [Footnote 58: General Comte Baudrand (1774-1848).]

    [Footnote 59: Son of Marshal Ney.]




_The Earl of Liverpool to Baron Stockmar._

_5th July 1837._

Went about half-past ten o'clock to Apsley House, and told the Duke
of Wellington the whole of my communication with the Queen, Duchess
of Kent, and Sir John Conroy on 15th June, also of my communication
subsequently with Lord Melbourne, all of which he very much approved
of. He said that he was quite sure that the Queen would find Lord
Melbourne an honourable man, and one in whom Her Majesty might put
confidence; that he was a man apt to treat matters too lightly, or,
as he expressed it, a _poco curante_, but in the main an honest and
an honourable man. Upon my speaking to him of the kind and paternal
conduct of King Leopold towards his Niece, he said that he was fully
persuaded of this, and should at all and any time be ready to uphold
it by his approbation, but that he had no immediate connection with
the Press, whose attacks indeed he held very cheap, though they were
frequently very offensive. He then asked me whether it was not true
that the Queen had thought of some reviews at which she would appear
on horseback. I said there had been some talk of it. He desired me to
say that he thought this would be very dangerous, that she had much
better do this in an open carriage, as no one except such as himself
knew how difficult it was to get steady riding horses, and besides
that, she could not be attended by any female, and that this would
appear indelicate.




[Pageheading: QUEEN ADELAIDE]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _7th July 1837._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--I must, before I leave this dear Castle, once more
express to you the grateful sense I entertain for the kind treatment I
have experienced from you since it has pleased our heavenly Father to
put you in possession of it. You have contributed much to my comfort
under all the painful and distressing circumstances of this time
of woe, and I assure you that I ever shall remember it with sincere
gratitude.

I hope that you continue quite well and do not suffer from the
exertions and duties of your new position. My best wishes and prayers
attend you on all occasions, for I shall be for the rest of my
life devoted and attached to you as your most affectionate Aunt and
Subject,

ADELAIDE.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

KENSINGTON PALACE, _10th July 1837._

The Queen regrets very much to hear of Lord Melbourne's indisposition,
and trusts it will be of no duration.

The Queen has just seen the Lord Chamberlain and has given him all her
orders. The Lord Chamberlain says that he will do everything in
his power to facilitate the Queen's going into Buckingham Palace on
Thursday.

The Queen fears that there may have been some mistake with respect to
the Chapter of the Garter, for Lord Conyngham,[60] as well as several
others, imagined it would be held on _Wednesday_ instead of _Friday_.
The Queen requests Lord Melbourne to rectify this mistake, as it is
the Queen's intention to hold the Chapter on _Friday_.

    [Footnote 60: The Lord Chamberlain.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_11th July 1837._

MY DEAREST, BEST UNCLE,--... I have got very little time and very
little to say. I _really_ and _truly_ go into Buckingham Palace the
day after to-morrow, but I must say, though I am very glad to do so, I
feel sorry to leave for _ever_ my poor old birthplace....

_25th._--I shall not go out of town, I think, before the 20th or
thereabouts of next month. Windsor requires thorough cleaning, and I
must say I could not think of going in sooner after the poor King's
death. Windsor always appears very melancholy to me, and there are so
many sad associations with it. These will vanish, I daresay, if I see
you there soon after my arrival there.

I have very pleasant large dinners every day. I invite my Premier
generally once a week to dinner as I think it right to show publicly
that I esteem him and have confidence in him, as he has behaved so
well. Stockmar is of this opinion and is his great admirer....




[Pageheading: MADAME DE LIEVEN]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _12th July 1837._

... Having still a few moments before a special messenger sets off, I
take advantage of it to add a few words. By all I can hear, there are
many intrigues on foot in England at this moment. Princess Lieven[61]
and another individual recently imported from her country seem to be
very active in what concerns them not; beware of them. A rule which I
cannot sufficiently recommend is, _never to permit_ people to speak
on subjects concerning yourself or your affairs, without your having
yourself desired them to do so. The moment a person behaves improperly
on this subject, change the conversation, and make the individual feel
that he has made a mistake.... People will certainly try to speak to
you on your _own personal_ affairs; decline it boldly, and they will
leave you alone....

Now I conclude with my warmest wishes for your happiness. Ever, my
dear Victoria, your faithfully attached Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.

[Footnote 61: The Princess Dorothea de Benckendorff married the Count
de Lieven at fifteen; in 1812, he became Russian Minister (and later
Ambassador) in London, whither she accompanied him. She was a woman
of extraordinary cleverness, enjoying the confidence of George
IV., Liverpool, Canning, Castlereagh, and Wellington. Inspiring the
efforts, and even composing the despatches of her husband, she became
herself the confidential correspondent of Nesselrode, Esterhazy, Posso
di Borgo, Guizot, and Lord Aberdeen. In 1834, the Lievens returned to
St Petersburg, where the Emperor Nicholas, though indifferent to the
society of women of talent, showed her special marks of regard. Her
husband died at Rome, in January 1838, and she established herself
in Paris, afterwards seeking a home in England during the troubles
of 1848. Returning to Paris, her _salon_ became again the resort of
diplomatists, politicians, and men of the world. She died in January
1857.

Madame de Lieven about this time told Greville that she had had an
audience of the Queen, "who was very civil and gracious, but timid
and embarrassed, and talked of nothing but commonplaces"; and Greville
adds that the Queen "had probably been told that the Princess was an
_intrigante_, and was afraid of committing herself."

Madame de Lieven wrote to Lord Aberdeen on the 30th July 1837:--

J'ai vu la Reine deux fois, je l'ai vue seule, et je l'ai vue dans la
société du soir, et avec son Premier Ministre. Elle a un aplomb, un
air de commandement, de dignité, qui avec son visage enfantin, sa
petite taille, et son joli sourire, forment certainement le spectacle
le plus extraordinaire qu'il soit possible de se figurer. Elle est
d'une extrême réserve dans son discours. On croit que la prudence est
une de ses premières qualités. Lord Melbourne a auprès d'elle un
air d'amour, de contentement, de vanité même, et tout cela mêlé avec
beaucoup de respect, des attitudes très à son aise, une habitude de
première place dans son salon, de la rêverie, de la gaieté, vous voyez
tout cela. La Reine est pleine d'aimables sourires pour lui.

La société le soir n'était composée que du household de la Reine, de
tout le household de la Duchesse de Kent (moins la famille Conroy, qui
n'approche pas du Palais), et de quelques étrangers. La Duchesse de
Kent est parfaitement mécontente,--elle m'en a même parlé. Je doute
que la mère et la fllle habitent longtemps sous le même toit. Quant
à Lord Melbourne, il me semble que la Duchesse le déteste. Il est
évident qu'il est dans la possession entière et exclusive de la
confiance de la Reine, et que ses ressentiments, comme ses peines
passées, sont confiés sans réserve à son Premier Ministre....]




[Pageheading: PARLIAMENT PROROGUED]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_18th July 1837._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,--... I have been so busy, I can say but two words
more, which are that I prorogued Parliament yesterday in person, was
very well received, and am not at all tired to-day, but quite frisky.
There is to be no review _this year_, as I was determined to have it
only if I _could ride_, and as I have not ridden for two years, it was
better not. Believe me, always, your devoted Niece,

    VICTORIA R.




_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

STANHOPE STREET, _22nd July 1837._

... With regard to Count Orloff,[62] your Majesty will probably renew
to him, on his taking leave, the assurances which your Majesty has
already given, of your desire to cement and maintain the friendly
alliance which subsists between the two Crowns; and an expression
might be repeated of the pleasure which your Majesty has derived from
the selection of a person who possesses the confidence and esteem of
the Emperor so fully as Count Orloff is known to do.

It might, perhaps, be as well to avoid any allusion to your Majesty's
not being personally acquainted with the Emperor, or anything that
might be construed into an invitation to that Sovereign to come to
England, because Viscount Palmerston has reason to believe that any
such hint would be eagerly caught at, while at the same time such
a visit does not, under all circumstances, seem to be a thing
particularly to be desired....

    [Footnote 62: The Russian Ambassador.]




[Pageheading: DISCRETION ADVISED]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _24th July 1837._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--... I hear that the Levée went off very well, and I
have no doubt that the Drawing-Room did the same. Your _spirit_ in all
these new and trying proceedings makes me _happy beyond expression_.
Believe me, with _courage_ and _honesty_, you will get on beautifully
and successfully. The firmness you displayed at the beginning of your
reign will be for your quiet of the utmost importance. People must
come to the opinion _it is of no use intriguing, because when her mind
is once made up, and she thinks a thing right_, no earthly power will
make her change. To these qualities must be added one which is of
great importance, this is _discretion_; humble as it seems, it has
often brought about successes in which talent failed and genius
did not succeed. Discretion in the great affairs of the world does
wonders, and safety depends frequently and is chiefly derived from
it....

Now I must quickly conclude, with the prayer that you will _not
permit_ anybody, be it even your Prime Minister, to speak to you on
matters that concern you _personally_, without _your_ having expressed
the wish of its being done. You have no idea of the importance of this
for your peace and comfort and safety. I always act on this principle,
and I can say with great success.

Believe me ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _29th July 1837._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--Your dear letter of the 24th inst. is, amongst _so
many kind letters_, _almost the kindest I yet received_ from your
dear hands. My happiness and my greatest pride will always be, to be
a _tender and devoted father to you, my beloved child_, and to watch
over you and stand by you with _heart_ and _soul as long_ as the heart
which _loves_ you so sincerely will beat.

I have no doubt that Lord Melbourne will always do everything in his
power to be useful to you. His position is become extremely happy;
after having been, under the late King at least, in an awkward
position, he is now sure of enjoying your confidence and sincere
support. If the elections turn out favourably to the Ministry, it
will, I hope, give them the means of trying to _conciliate_ the
great mass of the _moderate_ Tories, who from their nature and in
consequence of their opinions are safe and desirable supporters of the
Crown. The two extremes will give them trouble, and the ultra-Tories
appear to me to be even the _more unreasonable_ of the two.

I am most happy to see you on your guard against Princess Lieven and
such-like people. Your life amongst intriguers and tormented with
intrigues has given you an experience on this important subject which
you will do well not to lose sight of, as it will unfortunately often
_reproduce itself_, though the names and manner of carrying on the
thing may not be the same.

I also think Windsor a little melancholy, but I believe that one likes
it more and more, as the Park in particular is uncommonly beautiful.
We shall try our best to enliven it by our presence, and probably soon
after your arrival. I am most happy to see you so spirited and happy
in your new position; it will go a great way to ensure your success,
and your spirit and courage will never be _de trop_.

Now I will conclude for the day, not to bore you, and beg you always
to believe me, my dear and beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle and
Friend,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: PRINCESS HOHENLOHE]


_The Princess Hohenlohe to Queen Victoria._

LANGENBURG, _31st July 1837._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--On arriving here, I found your dear letter of
the 9th of this month; and some days ago I received the one of the
16th. Many, many thanks for them both; it is indeed kind of you to
write to me now when you have so much to do. You have no idea what a
feeling it is, to hear and read of you, and to think that it is _you_,
_my own dear sister_, who are the object of general observation, and,
I may say, admiration; it is sometimes like a dream. For those who are
near you it is quite different than for me, who have not seen you yet
in your new position, but must represent to myself all through the
report of others. The description in the papers of your proroguing
Parliament I read with great interest; it must have been an imposing
moment for you, your standing for the first time in your life in
the middle of that assembly where the interests and welfare of your
country are discussed and decided upon. It is with pride, pleasure,
and anxiety I think of you at the description of such scenes and
occurrences. I saw too by the papers that your _incognito_ at the
Opera was not quite kept as you wished it....




[Pageheading: THE ELECTIONS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _1st August 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--... I should be _most_ happy to "peep once" into
your country, and wish that it _could_ be.

With respect to Politics, Lord Melbourne told me this morning that he
thinks the Lords will be more moderate and reasonable next Session.
The Duke of Wellington made a speech shortly before the Dissolution of
Parliament, in which he said that _he wished as much as the Government
did to pass the questions now pending_.

You do not think Alexander[63] _near_ handsome enough in my opinion;
you know, ladies are much better judges. He is somewhat colossal,
I own, but very proportionate and good-looking, I think. I am all
impatience to hear more about all this, and when you imagine the
marriage will take place.

I have resumed my singing lessons with Lablache[64] twice a week,
which form an agreeable recreation in the midst of all the business I
have to do. He is such a good old soul, and greatly pleased that I go
on with him. I admire the music of the _Huguenots_ very much, but do
not sing it, as I prefer Italian to French for singing greatly. I
have been learning in the beginning of the season many of your old
favourites, which I hope to sing with you when we meet. I wish I could
keep Lablache to sing with us, but he will be gone by that time, I
greatly fear.

Now farewell, my beloved Uncle. Give my affectionate love to my dear
Aunt, and believe me always, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

_J'embrasse Léopold et Philippe._

[Footnote 63: Prince Alexander of Würtemberg, betrothed to Princess
Marie of Orleans, daughter of Louis Philippe. She died 10th January
1839. See Letter of Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians, 11th
January 1839.]

    [Footnote 64: See _ante_, p. 50. (Ch. V, Footnote 7)]




[Pageheading: THE ELECTIONS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_9th August 1837._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,--... With respect to the Elections, they are, I'm
thankful to say, rather favourable, though not quite so much so as
we could wish. But upon the whole we shall have as good a House as we
had, and, _I_ hope (as Lord Melbourne does also), a more moderate one
than the last one. The Irish Elections are very favourable to us; we
have gained six in the English boroughs, and lost, I grieve to say,
several in the counties.

The country is very quiet, and I have good reason to believe all will
do very well.

The King of Würtemberg is to arrive to-night, under the name of Count
Teck, and wishes to be in strict _incognito_. He comes on purpose to
see me; you know he is my second cousin--his mother[65] was sister
to Queen Caroline and daughter to my grand-aunt.[66] I shall give the
King a large dinner on Friday and a little concert after it....

    [Footnote 65: Queen Augusta of Würtemberg.]

    [Footnote 66: Augusta, Duchess of Brunswick, sister of George
    III.]




_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

ENDSLEIGH, _15th August 1837._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to lay before your Majesty a general statement of the
result of the elections, which, with the exception of one or two
doubtful counties in Ireland, may be said to be completed....

It is not to be denied that this near balance of parties makes the
task of conducting the government difficult for any Ministry. On
the other hand, the circumstances of the country do not present any
extraordinary difficulty, and were any such to arise, the general
composition of the new House of Commons affords a security that the
maintenance of the Constitution and the welfare of the country would
be permanent objects to the majority of its Members.[67]

Lord John Russell had some time ago the honour of stating to your
Majesty that the return of Mr Fox Maule for Perthshire, and of Mr Hume
for Middlesex, were hardly to be expected. In this as in many other
instances the superior organisation of the Tory party have enabled
them to gain the appearance of a change of opinion, which has not in
fact taken place.

Lord John Russell is sorry to add that bribery, intimidation, and
drunkenness have been very prevalent at the late elections, and that
in many cases the disposition to riot has only been checked by the
appearance of the Military, who have in all cases conducted themselves
with great temper and judgment.

    [Footnote 67: While the extreme Radicals were in several cases
    defeated, the number of O'Connell's followers was decidedly
    increased. The general balance of parties was not much
    affected, though the complaint made by Mr Roebuck, the Radical
    Member for Bath, in the last days of William IV.'s reign, that
    there was no Government, and that the machinery of legislation
    was at a dead stop, was no longer warranted.]




[Pageheading: LEAVING WINDSOR]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

ENDSLEIGH, _21st August 1837._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
has the honour to submit to your Majesty a letter from the Earl of
Coventry requesting an Audience.

It is usual for the Sovereign to receive any Peer who may be desirous
of an Audience, without any other person being present. But if the
Peer who is thus admitted to the honour of an Audience should enter
upon political topics, it has been the custom for your Majesty's
predecessors merely to hear what is offered, and not to give any
opinion, or to enter into any discussion or conversation upon such
topics.

Should your Majesty be pleased to grant Lord Coventry's request of
an Audience, perhaps the most convenient course will be that the
Lord-in-Waiting should signify to him, direct from Windsor, your
Majesty's pleasure.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._[68]

WINDSOR CASTLE, _19th September 1837._ (_20 m(inutes) p(ast) 11._)

MY DEAREST, MOST BELOVED UNCLE,--One line to express to you,
_imperfectly_, my thanks for all your _very_ great kindness to me, and
_my great_, _great_ grief at your departure! God knows _how sad_, _how
forlorn_, I feel! _How_ I _shall_ miss you, my dearest, dear Uncle!
_every, every where_! _How_ I shall miss your conversation! _How_ I
shall miss your _protection_ out riding! Oh! I feel _very_, _very_
sad, and cannot speak of you both without crying!

Farewell, my beloved Uncle and _father!_ may Heaven bless and protect
you; and do not forget your most affectionate, devoted, and attached
Niece and _Child_,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 68: Written on the conclusion of a visit of the King
    of the Belgians to England.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians_.

WINDSOR CASTLE, _3rd October 1837._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,--... I am quite sad to leave this fine place, where,
if it had not been for the meeting of Parliament _so_ early this year,
I would have remained till November. I have passed _such_ a pleasant
time here, the _pleasantest summer_ I have _ever_ passed in my life; I
have had the _great_ happiness of having you and my beloved Aunt here,
I have had pleasant people staying with me, and I have had delicious
rides which have done me more good than anything. It will be such a
break-up of our little circle! Besides my own people, Lord Melbourne
and Lord Palmerston are the only people who have been _staying_ here,
and this little party was very social and agreeable. The Princess
Augusta of Saxony[69] has been here for two nights; she is neither
young nor handsome, but a very kind good person.

The news from Portugal are bad which I got this morning. The Civil War
is _ended_, and the _Chartists_ have been _completely defeated_; this
is sad enough, but I was fearful of it: a counter-revolution _never_
does well.[70]

_En revanche_, the news from Spain are by far better....

Believe me always, in haste, your devoted and affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 69: Daughter of King Frederick Augustus of Saxony.]

    [Footnote 70: On July 1st a new Ministry had come into
    power in Portugal. The finances of the country were in great
    confusion, a military insurrection broke out in the North at
    Braga, the Ministry resigned, and a new Ministry came into
    office in August. On the 18th August, the Duke of Terceira,
    followed by many persons of distinction, joined the
    insurgents, and, establishing himself at Mafra, advanced upon
    Lisbon with the Chartist troops, issuing a proclamation of
    provisional regency. A Convention was eventually signed, and
    the Cortes proceeded to discuss measures of Constitutional
    Reform.]




[Pageheading: RECEPTION AT BRIGHTON]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_6th October 1837._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and in
acknowledging your Majesty's gracious communication, of yesterday
returns his thanks for the very lively account which your Majesty has
given of the journey and the entrance into Brighton. Lord Melbourne
entirely partakes in the wish your Majesty has been graciously pleased
to express that he had been there to witness the scene; but your
Majesty will at once perceive that it was better that he was not, as
in that case Lord Melbourne would have been accused of an attempt
to take a political advantage of the general enthusiasm and to mix
himself and the Government with your Majesty's personal popularity.
Lord Melbourne fears that for some time your Majesty will find
yourself somewhat incommoded by the desire, which naturally prevails
amongst all ranks and classes, to obtain an opportunity of seeing your
Majesty....




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _9th October 1837._

... I have also told Stockmar to try to settle something for _regular_
safe communication; in quiet times like the present, one a week would
be sufficient. You know now that all letters are read, and that should
not be _always_ the case with ours. There is, however, one thing
about which I think it right to warn you. This way of reading people's
letters is often taken advantage of by the writers of them, who
are _not so ignorant of the thing as is imagined_ to write the very
subject which they wish to convey to the ears of persons without
compromising themselves. I will give you an example: we are still
plagued by Prussia concerning those fortresses; now, to tell the
Prussian Government many things, which we _should not like_ to tell
them _officially_, the Minister is going to write a despatch to our
man at Berlin, sending it _by post_; the Prussians _are sure_ to read
it, and to learn in this way what we wish them to hear. The diplomats
in England may resort to this same mode of proceeding to injure
people, to calumniate, and to convey to your knowledge such things
as they may hope to have the effect of injuring some people _they may
fear_, in your eyes. I tell you the _trick_, that you should be able
to guard against it; it is of importance, and I have no doubt will be
resorted to by various political people.... Ever, my dearest Victoria,
your faithfully devoted Uncle and Friend,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: ENGLAND AND FRANCE]

[Pageheading: LOUIS PHILIPPE'S POLICY]

[Pageheading: COUNT MOLÉ]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

TRIANON, _19th October 1837._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--... There is a great disposition here to be on
the best possible terms with England. As it has but too often happened
that the diplomatic agents of the two countries have drawn, or been
believed to draw, different ways, I recommended strongly to Count
Molé[71] to give strong and clear instructions to his people,
particularly at Madrid, Lisbon, and Athens.... He is going to read
them to Lord Granville, and also to communicate as much as possible
all the despatches of the French diplomats to the English Government.
This will be a proof of confidence, and it will besides have the
advantage of giving often useful information, enabling thereby the
English Government to hear two opinions instead of one. It cannot be
denied that the idea that the Plenipotentiaries of the two countries
were following two different lines of policy has been hurtful to
the causes of the two Queens in the Peninsula. To put a stop to this
double action is the only benefit which the Queens will at present
derive from a better understanding between England and France; but as
it is, it will be still of some importance to them, and take away from
the different political parties the possibility of using the pretended
misunderstanding against the Government of the Queens. I trust that
you will tell your Ministers to meet this friendly disposition with
frankness and kindness. The wish of the King here is, to have matters
concerted between the Plenipotentiaries of both countries. In this way
it would become difficult for the parties in Spain or Portugal to
say that the two Plenipotentiaries support different candidates for
Ministerial power, and the division in the parties connected with the
Queens might be in this manner _prevented_ or _reconciled_. Many and
many are the ill-natured hints thrown out against the King's policy
here, and because he is clever, he is suspected of having _ambitious
schemes without end_; it may not be without some importance to set
this, in your mind at least, to rights. Whatever may have been the
King's views immediately after the revolution of July[72] I will not
decide; perhaps he may a moment have wished to be able to do something
for France. Supposing this for the sake of argument to have been so,
two months of his reign were sufficient to show him that the great
question was not to conquer territories or foreign influence, but
to save Monarchy. He saw clearly that though _he_ might begin a war,
necessarily it would soon degenerate into a war of propaganda, and
that he and his family would be the first victims of it. His struggle
has constantly been to strengthen his Government, to keep together or
create anew the elements indispensable for a Monarchical Government,
and this struggle is far from being at its end, and most probably
the remainder of his life will be devoted to this important task; and
whatever may be the more lively disposition of the Duke of Orleans,
great part of his reign if he comes to the throne, and perhaps the
_whole_ of it, will, _bon gré mal gré_, take the same turn. That it
should be so _is very natural_, because of _what use_ would be some
_foreign provinces_ if they would only add to the difficulty of
governing the old? Therefore, knowing as I do all the proceedings
of the King and his Cabinet, even more fully than I do those of your
Government; seeing constantly in the most unreserved manner the whole
of the despatches; knowing as the nearest neighbour the system that
they constantly followed up towards us, I must say that no one is
more against acquiring influence in foreign States, or even getting
burthened with family aggrandisement in them, than he. He rejected
most positively the marriage of Joinville with Donna Maria because he
will not have anything to do with Portugal. He rejects a _mille_ times
the idea of a future union of the Queen of Spain with Aumale, because
he will not have a son where it _is not_ his intention to support him.

His fear of being drawn into a real intervention has been the cause
of his having been so anxious not to have a French Legion in Spain. He
may be right or wrong on this subject--I do not decide this, as I was
of a different opinion last year; but his fear of being drawn too
far, like a man whose clothes get caught by a steam-engine, is natural
enough. His dislike to the ultra-Liberals in the Peninsula is also
very natural, because they uphold principles of Government which
render Monarchy impossible, and the application of which to France
would be the ruin of the King. England, from the peculiarity of
its position, can do many things which in France would upset
everything.... I must close my letter, and shall answer yours
to-morrow. God bless you! Ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted
Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 71: French Premier and Foreign Secretary.]

    [Footnote 72: 1830.]



_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

PAVILION, BRIGHTON, _25th October 1837._

... Now, dearest Uncle, I must speak to you _un peu de Politique_.
I made Lord Melbourne read the _political_ part of your letter. He
wished me to communicate to you part of the contents of a letter of
Lord Granville's which we received yesterday. Lord Granville complains
a good deal of Molé,[73] and says, that though he is apparently very
cordial and friendly towards us, and talks of his desire that we
should be on a better footing as to our foreign Ministers than we have
hitherto been, that whenever Lord Granville urges him to do anything
decisive (to use Lord G.'s own words) "he _shrinks_ from the
discussion," says he must have time to reflect before he can give any
answer, and evades giving any reply, whenever anything of _importance_
is required. This, you see, dear Uncle, is not satisfactory. I merely
tell you this, as I think you would like to know what Molé tells _our_
Ambassador; this differs from what he told _you_. What you say
about Louis Philippe I am sure is very true; his situation is a very
peculiar and a very difficult one....

    [Footnote 73: See _ante_, p. 93. (Ch. VI, Footnote 71)]




[Pageheading: THE FRENCH IN AFRICA]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

TRIANON, _27th October 1837._

... Political matters I shall not touch upon to-day; there is nothing
very particular except the taking of Constantin.[74] The Duc de
Nemours has greatly distinguished himself. I am sorry to see that in
England people are sometimes _sufficiently absurd_ to be jealous of
these French conquests. Nothing indeed can be more absurd, as nothing
is of greater _importance to the peace_ of Europe than that a powerful
and military nation like the French should have this outlet for their
love of military display. If one had named a council of wise men to
fix upon a spot where this might be done with _the least mischief_ to
the rest of the world, one should have named the coast of Africa. By
their being there they will render to civilisation a country which for
about 800 years has been growing worse and worse, and which was in the
times of the Romans one of the richest provinces. It settles, besides,
upon the French a constant _petite guerre_ with the natives, which is
the very thing that will do them good.

    [Footnote 74: The French losses amounted to 19 officers and 86
    men killed, with 38 officers and 468 men wounded. The
    French Government had failed in its efforts for an amicable
    arrangement with Achmet Bey, and it appeared probable that the
    Turkish fleet would also oppose them. The commander, however,
    merely landed some men at Tripoli, and the French success was
    complete.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _19th November 1837._

... Now, dearest Uncle, before I say anything more, I will answer the
various questions in your letter, which I have communicated to
Lord Melbourne and Lord Palmerston. (1) With respect to Ferdinand's
question to you, it is impossible for _us_ to say _beforehand_ _what_
we _shall_ do in _such_ an _emergency_; it depends so entirely on the
peculiar _circumstances_ of the _moment_ that we cannot say what we
should do. You know, dear Uncle, that the fleet has orders to protect
the King and Queen in case they should be in any personal danger. As
to Lord Howard,[75] though what you say about him is true enough, it
would not do to recall him at present; it would give Bois le Comte[76]
all the advantage he _wishes_ for, and which would be injurious to our
interests and influence.

(2) With regard to Spain, a very decided mention is made of the
_Queen_ herself in the speech which is to be delivered by me to-morrow
in the House of Lords.

We have great reason to know that, of late, the Queen has positively
declared her intention to remain at Madrid to the very last.

Villiers'[77] conduct has been, I fear, much misrepresented, for his
_own_ opinions are not at all those of the _ultra-Liberal_ kind; and
his _only_ aim has been, to be on good terms with the Spanish Ministry
for the time being.

(3) Concerning France, I need not repeat to you, dear Uncle, how
_very_ anxious we all are to be upon the _best_ and _most friendly_
terms with her, and to co-operate with her.

    [Footnote 75: Lord Howard de Walden, British Minister at
    Lisbon.]

    [Footnote 76: French Minister at Madrid.]

    [Footnote 77: British Minister at Madrid, afterwards fourth
    Earl of Clarendon, and twice Foreign Secretary.]




[Pageheading: CLOSE OF THE SESSION]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _25th December 1837._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--... You will, I am sure, be happy to hear that
this Session is happily closed, and that the whole has gone off very
satisfactorily, much more so even than any of us could hope. I went
on Saturday to the House of Lords to give my Assent to the Civil List
Bill. I shall return to town on the 16th of January, when Parliament
meets again; it meets sooner than it was at first intended it should,
on account of the affairs of Canada.




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._[78]

LAEKEN, _26th December 1837._

MY DEAREST CHILD,--You were _somewhat irritable_ when you wrote to
me!... Affairs stand now as follows: the studies at Bonn take the
whole of April, and may be concluded at the beginning of May. From May
till the end of August, if you approved of the visit, the time should
be _utilisé_. A _séjour_ at Coburg would _not_ be of much use; here
we are generally absent in the summer. To confide therefore the young
gentleman to his Uncle Mensdorff[79] for three months, would give him
so much time for some _manly accomplishments_, which do no harm to a
young man. To make him _enter the Service_ would _not_ do at all. What
you say about his imbibing principles of a political nature, there
is no great fear of that. First of all, Prague is not a town where
politics are at all agitated; these topics are very rarely touched
upon; besides, Albert is clever, and it is not at the eleventh
hour that anybody in three months will make him imbibe political
principles. Perhaps you will turn in your mind what you think on the
subject, and communicate me the result of it....

    [Footnote 78: This letter refers to the course of study which
    Prince Albert was about to pursue.]

    [Footnote 79: Count Emmanuel de Mensdorff-Pouilly, who
    married, in 1804, Sophia, Princess of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld.]




[Pageheading: CANADA]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_27th December 1837._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and acquaints
your Majesty that he has this morning received a letter from
the Speaker[80] consenting to remain until Whitsuntide. This is
inconvenient enough, but the delay relieves your present embarrassment
upon this head, and puts off changes until a period of the Session
when public affairs will be more decisively settled.

Lord Melbourne is sorry to have to inform your Majesty that there was
a good deal of difference of opinion yesterday in the Cabinet upon the
affairs of Canada.[81] All are of opinion that strong measures should
be taken for the repression of the insurrection, but some, and more
particularly Lord Howick, think that these measures of vigour should
be accompanied by measures of amendment and conciliation. We are to
have a Cabinet again upon the subject on Wednesday next, when Lord
Melbourne hopes that some practical result will be come to without
serious difference.

    [Footnote 80: Mr James Abercromby, afterwards Lord
    Dunfermline. He remained in the Chair till 1839. He had little
    hold over the House, and many regrettable scenes occurred.]

    [Footnote 81: See Introductory Note, p. 56. (to Ch. VI)]



_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _28th December 1837._

The Queen received Lord Melbourne's communication yesterday evening,
and is glad to see that the Speaker consents to remain a little while
longer, though, as Lord Melbourne says, it is still very inconvenient.

The Queen regrets that there should have been any difference of
opinion with respect to Canada, but hopes with Lord Melbourne that
some final arrangement may be come to next Wednesday.

The Queen is very sorry to learn that Lord Melbourne will be detained
in London until Saturday. She omitted to ask Lord Melbourne when he
thinks it would be convenient for Lord Palmerston to come down to
Windsor for a few days, as it is the Queen's wish to ask him in the
course of the Recess. The Queen is very thankful to Lord Melbourne for
his kind enquiries after her health; she is sorry to say she had one
of her bad headaches yesterday, but feels very well this morning and
thinks a drive will quite cure her.




[Pageheading: ARMY ESTIMATES]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _29th December 1837._

The Queen received Lord Melbourne's two letters yesterday evening, and
another this morning, enclosing one from Lord Duncannon.[82] The Queen
is very much gratified by the kind expressions in the letter she got
last night; she is grieved to see Lord Melbourne is so much oppressed
with business.

The Queen thinks Lord Melbourne has acted with the greatest judgment
with respect to Sir J. Conroy,[83] and highly approves the course he
intends pursuing.

The Queen regrets that there should be so much difficulty with respect
to the Report of the Army Estimates, but fervently trusts that no
serious difficulties will arise from it; she will be very anxious to
talk about this and many other matters when she sees Lord Melbourne,
which the Queen _hopes_ (as Lord Melbourne says nothing to the
contrary) she will do on the 3rd or 4th.

The Queen thinks that it will be quite right if Lord Melbourne writes
to Lord John about the Staffordshire Yeomanry. The Queen will be
delighted to see Lady John Russell's little girl, and would be very
happy if Lady John was to bring the _Baby_ also. The Queen begs Lord
Melbourne to invite them (Lord and Lady John) in her name on the 8th,
and to stay till the 11th.

The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are here, and the Queen is very
sorry to say, that from what she _sees_ and _hears_, she has reason to
fear all is _not_ as it _should_ be; _her_ mother is most _markedly_
civil and affectionate towards both the Duke and Duchess, and spoke
Politics with the former. The Queen will tell Lord Melbourne more
about this when she sees him.

The weather was beautiful yesterday, and the Queen had a _long_ drive
and _walk_, which have done her great good; it is still finer to-day.

    [Footnote 82: Commissioner of Woods and Forests and Lord Privy
    Seal.]

    [Footnote 83: Sir J. Conroy, who had been Comptroller to
    the Duchess of Kent, made certain claims which it was not
    considered expedient to grant. He received a pension and a
    baronetcy.]




[Pageheading: CANADA]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_30th December 1837._

... Lord Melbourne will do his utmost to compose these differences
respecting Canada and the Army,[84] but your Majesty must contemplate
the possibility, not to say the probability, of his not being able
to succeed. It will not do for the sake of temporary accommodation to
sacrifice the honour of your Majesty's Crown or the interests of your
Majesty's subjects.

    [Footnote 84: _See_ Introductory Notes for 1837 and 1838, pp.
    56 and 102. (to Ch. VI and Ch. VII)]




[Pageheading: STATE DEPARTMENTS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_31st December 1837._

... Lord Melbourne has not yet been able to leave London. In order to
have a chance of arranging these troublesome affairs it is necessary
continually to see those who are principally engaged in them. From
a conversation which he has had this evening with Lord Howick, Lord
Melbourne has better hopes of producing a general agreement upon
Canadian affairs, but the question of the administration of the Army,
which is of less immediate importance, is of more difficulty. Your
Majesty knows the importance attached by the King of the Belgians to
this matter. The opinion of the Duke of Wellington is also strongly
against the projected alteration. On the other hand, five Cabinet
Ministers have pledged themselves to it by signing the report, and
consider themselves as having publicly undertaken to the House of
Commons that some such measure shall be proposed. Lord Melbourne has
asked for the opinions of Lord Hill[85] and Sir Hussey Vivian[86] in
writing. When Lord Melbourne receives them he must submit them to your
Majesty with as short and as clear a statement as he can make of a
question which is of a technical and official character, and with
which Lord Melbourne does not feel himself to be very familiar. Lord
Melbourne transmits a copy of the proposed Order in Council to carry
the recommendation of the report into effect, which will acquaint your
Majesty precisely what the powers and duties are which it is intended
to transfer from the Secretary of State[87] to the Secretary-at-War.
It is the more necessary to be cautious, because it can be done
without taking the opinion or having recourse to the authority of
Parliament.

Your Majesty will not suppose that Lord Melbourne by laying before you
the whole case has an idea of throwing the weight of such a decision
entirely upon your Majesty. Lord Melbourne will deem it his duty to
offer your Majesty a decided opinion upon the subject.

Lord Melbourne is much rejoiced to hear that your Majesty enjoys
Windsor. The Duchess of Sutherland,[88] who appreciates both the grand
and the beautiful, could not be otherwise than delighted with it....

Lord Melbourne has the pleasure of wishing your Majesty a happy and
prosperous New Year.

    [Footnote 85: Commander-in-Chief.]

    [Footnote 86: Master-General of the Ordnance.]

    [Footnote 87: The Secretaries of State (then three, now five
    in number) have co-extensive authority, that is to say, any
    one of them can legally execute the duties of all, although
    separate spheres of action are for convenience assigned to
    them; at that time the administration of Colonial and Military
    affairs were combined, the Secretary-at-War not being a
    Secretary of State. After the Crimean War a fourth Secretary
    was appointed, and after the Indian Mutiny a fifth was added,
    entrusted severally with the supervision of Military affairs
    and the administration of India. See letters of Lord Melbourne
    of 1st, 4th, and 5th November 1841. (Ch. X, 'Secretaries of State')]

    [Footnote 88: Harriet Elizabeth Georgiana, Duchess of
    Sutherland (1806-1868), was the daughter of the sixth Earl of
    Carlisle, and married her cousin, Earl Gower (1786-1861), who
    became Duke of Sutherland in 1833. On the accession of the
    Queen, the Duchess of Sutherland became Mistress of the Robes,
    a post which she held till 1841, and on three subsequent
    occasions. The Duchess was a cultivated woman with many
    tastes, and made Stafford House a great social centre. She was
    deeply interested in philanthropic and social movements, such
    as the Abolition of Slavery, and had a strong sympathy for
    national movements, which she showed by entertaining Garibaldi
    in 1864. She combined a considerable sense of humour with a
    rare capacity for affection, and became one of the Queen's
    closest friends; after the Prince Consort's death she was for
    some weeks the Queen's constant companion.]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER VII


The Melbourne Ministry were able to maintain themselves in office
during the year (1838), but were too weak to carry important measures.
The prevailing distress led to much criticism of the Poor Law Act of
1834, and the disturbances in Canada turned the tide of emigration
to Australia. But public interest in politics was eclipsed by the
gaieties of the Coronation, in which all ranks partook. The events
of Imperial importance elsewhere centred in Jamaica and Canada, the
apprenticeship system in the former place leading to a renewal of the
anti-slavery agitation at home, and the passing of a Colonial Bill for
absolute emancipation. The Canadian troubles brought about the passing
of an Imperial Act for the suspension for two years of the Legislative
Assembly of Lower Canada, and Lord Durham, an impulsive and
generous-hearted man, was sent out as High Commissioner. Having
dismissed the Executive Council of his predecessor, he nominated a
fresh one, but an ordinance thereafter promulgated in reference to
the rebels was severely criticised. Lord Brougham, rejoicing at the
opportunity of paying off old scores, castigated the Government,
especially Lord Glenelg, the Colonial Secretary, and carried a measure
censuring their Canadian policy. The Ministry disallowed the ordinance
of Lord Durham, who, finding himself unsupported, resigned his
Commission and returned home. On his arrival at Plymouth, he made a
speech, in which he described the rebellion as finally at an end;
the news, however, subsequently arrived that after his departure from
Canada, disturbances had broken out afresh. Sir John Colborne was
appointed to succeed Lord Durham with full powers.

The Civil War continued in Spain through the year, and intermittent
rioting took place in Portugal, a country which was now verging on
bankruptcy. The old Dutch and Belgian controversy as to the possession
of Luxemburg was revived, the King of Holland, who had obstinately
withheld his concurrence for six years from the Articles on the faith
of which King Leopold accepted the throne of Belgium, now showing
overt hostility in the disputed territory. As was natural, France was
in sympathy with Belgium, and the two countries entered into a treaty
of commerce and reciprocity.




CHAPTER VII

1838


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_1st January 1838._

... Lord Melbourne feels most deeply the extreme kindness of your
Majesty's expressions. Whatever may happen in the course of events,
it will always be to Lord Melbourne a source of the most lively
satisfaction to have assisted your Majesty in the commencement of your
reign, which was not without trouble and difficulty, and your Majesty
may depend that whether in or out of office Lord Melbourne's conduct
will always be directed by the strongest attachment to your Majesty's
person, and by the most ardent desire to promote your Majesty's
interests, which from his knowledge of your Majesty's character and
disposition Lord Melbourne feels certain will be always identified
with the interests of your People.




[Pageheading: CANADA]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_14th January 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has the
honour of acknowledging your Majesty's gracious communication, which
he received this evening. Lord Melbourne has this morning seen Lord
Durham upon the subject of his assuming the Government of Canada,[1]
and has had a long conversation with him. Lord Melbourne is to receive
his final answer before the Cabinet to-morrow, which meets at ten
o'clock. Lord Durham is anxious that your Majesty should express to
him your wish, or rather, as he phrased it, lay upon him your commands
that he should undertake this duty, and also that, as his absence will
be but temporary, that Lady Durham[2] should retain her situation in
your Majesty's household. Lord Melbourne thinks that your Majesty may
properly gratify him in both these points. Lord Durham made some other
stipulations, which Lord Melbourne will explain to your Majesty, but,
upon the whole, Lord Melbourne feels little doubt that he will accept.

Lord Glenelg[3] is on Monday to make a statement to the House of Lords
upon the subject of Canada, on which a debate may not improbably arise
by which Lord Melbourne may be detained. On Wednesday there is neither
House of Lords nor Cabinet dinner. Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday will
therefore be festive days, on which Lord Melbourne will have great
pleasure in obeying your Majesty's commands and also on Monday, if he
should not be kept in the House of Lords.

Lord Melbourne thinks it was prudent in your Majesty not to expose
yourself to the cold of the Chapel. He is himself better, but has
still much cough, though he has kept himself very quiet and been very
careful of his diet since he has been in London.

    [Footnote 1: In the room of Lord Gosford. See _ante_, p. 102. Ch. VII,
      (Introductory Note to Ch. VII)]

    [Footnote 2: Daughter of Earl Grey.]

    [Footnote 3: Colonial Secretary.]




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _15th January 1838._ (_Half-past nine o'clock._)

The Queen has written _approved_ on Lord Melbourne's letter as
he desired; but adds a line to express her _satisfaction_ at Lord
Durham's having accepted the office of Governor-General of Canada.

The Queen will be very happy to see Lord Melbourne at half-past three.


[Pageheading: INFLUENCE OF THE CROWN]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _16th January 1838._

MY DEARLY BELOVED CHILD,--... I am very grateful for Lord Melbourne's
kind recollection of me. I have a sincere regard for him, and I think
that our intercourse has satisfied him of one thing, that I have
nothing so much at heart than your welfare, and what is for the good
of your Empire. I wish very much that you would speak with him on
the subject of what ought to be done to keep for the Crown the little
influence it still may possess. His views on this important subject
are the more trustworthy as he always has belonged to the moderate
Liberals, and therefore has had the means of judging the matter
with great impartiality. Monarchy to be carried on requires certain
elements, and the occupation of the Sovereign must be constantly to
_preserve these elements_, or should they have been too much weakened
by untoward circumstances, to contrive by every means to _strengthen
them again_. You are too clever not to know, that it is _not_ the
being _called_ Queen or King, which can be of the _least consequence_,
when to the title there is not also annexed the power indispensable
for the exercise of those functions. All trades must be learned, and
nowadays the trade of a _constitutional Sovereign, to do it well, is a
very difficult one_.

... I must end, and remain ever, most affectionately, my dear Child,
your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

_24th January 1838._


MY DEAREST NIECE,--Having just been informed of your gracious
consideration of, and your generosity towards, the dear King's
children,[4] I must express to you how deeply I feel this kind proof
of your attachment to the late King, whose memory you respect by the
generous continuance of their former allowances from the Privy Purse.
Nothing could have given me more real satisfaction, and I trust and
hope that they will prove their gratitude and entire devotion to you
by their future conduct. Let me thank you, dearest Victoria, from the
bottom of my heart, and be assured that the heavenly blessing of our
beloved King will be upon you for your generous kindness to those he
loved so much in this world.

I hope that you have not suffered at all from the severity of the
weather, and are as well as all your subjects can wish you to be,
amongst whom there is none more anxiously praying for your welfare
and happiness than, my dear Niece, your most devoted and affectionate
Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 4: The eldest of the five illegitimate sons of
    William IV. and Mrs. Jordan had been created Earl of Munster,
    and his sisters and brothers had been given the precedence
    of the daughters and younger sons of a Marquis. The Queen now
    continued the same allowances as they had received from the
    late King.]




[Pageheading: DANIEL O'CONNELL]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _22nd February 1838._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--... I had a very brilliant Levée again yesterday, at
which O'Connell and all his sons, son-in-law, nephew, etc., appeared.
I received him, as you may imagine, with a very smiling face; he has
been behaving very well this year.[5] It was quite a treat for me to
see him, as I had for long wished it.

We are going on most prosperously here, which will, I am sure, give
you as much pleasure as it does me. We have no fear for any of the
questions. Lord John Russell is much pleased with the temper of the
House of Commons, which he says is remarkably good, and the Duke of
Wellington is behaving uncommonly well, going _with Ministers_, and
behaving like an honest man _should_ do....

    [Footnote 5: Ever since the Accession, O'Connell's speeches
    had been full of expressions of loyalty, and he had been
    acting in concert with the Whigs.]




[Pageheading: DEPARTMENTS OF STATE]

[Pageheading: BUREAUCRACY]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

STANHOPE STREET, _25th February 1838._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and with
reference to your Majesty's question upon the subjects to which Lord
William Russell's recent despatch relates, he has the honour to state:
that in the Governments of the Continent, and more especially in those
which have no representative Assemblies, the second class of persons
in the public offices possess and exercise much more power and
influence than the corresponding class of persons do in this
country. In England the Ministers who are at the head of the several
departments of the State, are liable any day and every day to defend
themselves in Parliament; in order to do this, they must be minutely
acquainted with all the details of the business of their offices, and
the only way of being constantly armed with such information is to
conduct and direct those details themselves.

On the Continent, where Ministers of State are not liable so to be
called to account for their conduct, the Ministers are tempted
to leave the details of their business much more to their
Under-Secretaries and to their chief clerks. Thus it happens that
all the routine of business is generally managed by these subordinate
agents; and to such an extent is this carried, that Viscount
Palmerston believes that the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, in France,
Austria, Prussia, and Russia, seldom take the trouble of writing
their own despatches, except, perhaps, upon some very particular and
important occasion.

Your Majesty will easily see how greatly such a system must place in
the hands of the subordinate members of the public departments the
power of directing the policy and the measures of the Government;
because the value and tendency, and the consequences of a measure,
frequently depend as much upon the manner in which that measure
is worked out, as upon the intention and spirit with which it was
planned.

Another circumstance tends also to give great power to these
second-class men, and that is their permanence in office.

In England when, in consequence of some great political change, the
Heads of Departments go out, the greater part of the Under-Secretaries
go out also; thus the Under-Secretary (with two or three exceptions)
having come in with his Chief, has probably no more experience than
his Chief, and can seldom set up his own knowledge to overrule the
opinion, or to guide the judgment, of his superior.

But on the Continent, changes of Ministers are oftener changes of
individual men from personal causes, than changes of parties from
political convulsions; and therefore when the Chief retires, the
Under-Secretary remains. There are consequently in all the public
offices abroad a number of men who have spent the greater part of
their lives in their respective departments, and who by their long
experience are full of knowledge of what has been done in former
times, and of the most convenient and easy manner of doing what may be
required in the time present. This affords to the Chiefs an additional
motive for leaning upon their subordinates, and gives to those
subordinates still more real influence.

This class of subordinate men has, from the fact of its being
possessed of so much power, been invested by the jargon of the day
with the title of "Bureaucratic"--a name fabricated in imitation of
the words "aristocratic" and "democratic," each being compounded of
the word "cratic," which is a corruption from the Greek word "kratos,"
which means power; and the prefix, denoting the particular class of
society whose power is meant to be expressed. Thus "_aristo_-cratic"
is the power of the upper, or, as in Greek it is called, the "aristos"
class of society; "_demo_-cratic" is the power of the people, which in
Greek is called the "demos"; and "_bureau_-cratic" is the power of the
public offices or "bureaus," for which latter the French name has been
taken instead of a Greek word.

It appears, then, to be the opinion of Lord William Russell, that this
second class of public men in Prussia are animated by a desire to
see the general policy of their country rendered more national and
independent than it has hitherto been; that for this purpose they were
desirous of urging on the Government to take its stand against foreign
influence upon some point or other, not much caring what that
point might be; that they thought it would be difficult to choose a
political question, because on such a question the King of Prussia
might be against them, and that consequently they chose a religious
question, on which they knew they should have the King with them;
and that accordingly they led the Government on to a quarrel with the
Court of Rome, and with the Catholic or Austrian party in Germany,
more with a view to place Prussia in an independent national position
than from any particular importance which they attached to the
question itself upon which the rupture was to be effected.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_21st March 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. The House
sate until half-past eleven last night. Lord Stanhope[6] made a long
declamatory speech, very violent, but having in it nothing defined
or specific, and was answered by Lord Brougham in a most able and
triumphant defence and maintenance of the late Act for Amending the
Laws for the Relief of the Poor.[7]

Lord Melbourne was very sorry to be prevented from waiting upon your
Majesty. He is very grateful for your Majesty's enquiries, and feels
very well this morning....

Lord Minto[8] told Lord Melbourne last night to acquaint your
Majesty that Lord Amelius Beauclerck,[9] your Majesty's first Naval
Aide-de-Camp, intended to ask an Audience to-day of your Majesty,
and that the object of it was to request that he and the other
Aides-de-Camp might wear sashes. This was always refused by the
late King as being absurd and ridiculous--as it is, particularly
considering Lord Amelius's figure--and your Majesty had perhaps better
say that you can make no change.

Lord Melbourne will be at St James's twenty minutes before ten.

    [Footnote 6: Philip Henry, fourth Earl.]

    [Footnote 7: Before 1834 a great source of public abuse was
    the out-door relief given to able-bodied paupers, either in
    kind or money. The Act of that year was based on the
    principle that no one must perish through the want of the bare
    necessities of life. Poor Law Commissioners were established,
    England was divided into Districts, and the Districts into
    Unions. Out-door relief was to be given, on the order of
    two justices, to poor persons wholly unable, from age or
    infirmity, to work. But there was much opposition to the
    new law; it was considered a grievance that old couples were
    refused relief at home, and that the sexes must be separated
    at the workhouse, to which the name of "Bastille" began to be
    attached. In Devonshire it was even believed that the bread
    distributed by the relieving officers was mixed with poisonous
    ingredients.]

    [Footnote 8: The First Lord of the Admiralty.]

    [Footnote 9: A son of the eighth Duke of St Albans.]




[Pageheading: PRESSURE OF BUSINESS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _4th April 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--_Vous ne m'en voudrez pas_, I sincerely hope, for
not having written to you sooner to thank you for your kind letter,
which I received last week, but I really could not do so. As _honesty
is the best policy_, I will tell you the simple fact. I have been out
riding every day for about three hours, which quite renovates me,
and when I come home I have consequently a good deal to do, what with
seeing people, reading despatches, writing, etc. You will, I trust,
now quite forgive your poor niece, whom you so often call "the little
Queen," which is, I fear, true; but her _feelings_ of affection are
not so small as her _body_ is, I can assure you.

The Prince de Ligne[10] will be received with every possible
attention, I can promise; it would have been so _without_ his being
recommended; his rank, and, above all, his being one of your subjects,
would of course entitle him to a good reception from me....

There is another _sujet_ which I wish to mention to you, _et que j'ai
bien à c[oe]ur_, which is, if you would consult Stockmar with respect
to the finishing of Albert's education; he knows best my feelings and
wishes on that subject....

    [Footnote 10: He was appointed to attend the Coronation as
    Minister Extraordinary from King Leopold.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_5th April 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is much
distressed that, being in the House of Lords, he was unable to answer
your Majesty's letter as soon as he received it. Lord Melbourne went
to the Palace about half-past four, but learning from the porter at
the gate that your Majesty was not returned, went away thinking that
there was not left time to see your Majesty before the House of Lords.
Lord Melbourne is very much concerned that your Majesty should have
hastened at all, and most earnestly requests your Majesty never will
do so upon his account. Lord Melbourne hears with great pleasure
that your Majesty has had a pleasant ride, and likes your horse.
Lord Melbourne is very well himself, and will wait upon your Majesty
to-morrow morning about ten minutes before ten.




[Pageheading: FAVOURITE HORSES]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _10th April 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I received your kind letter of the 5th on Sunday,
and return you my best thanks for it. I shall, before I say another
word, answer your question about the horses which I ride, which I do
the more willingly as I have got two _darlings_, if I may use that
word. They are, both of them, _quite perfect_ in every sense of the
word; _very handsome_, full of _spirit_, delightful easy-goers, very
quiet, and _never_ shying at anything. Is not this perfection? The one
called _Tartar_ (which belonged to Lord Conyngham), an Irish horse,
is a very dark brown, a beautiful creature; the other, which Lord
Uxbridge[11] got for me, is called _Uxbridge_; he is smaller than
Tartar, and is a dark chestnut, with a beautiful little Arabian
head. I am afraid I shall have bored you with this long account of my
horses.

I am going to Windsor to-morrow afternoon, and have got a great deal
to do in consequence....

Poor dear Louie[12] _lingers_ on, but, alas! I can only say _lingers_;
she does not gain strength. I cannot say how it grieves me, I am so
sincerely attached to the good old soul, who has known me ever since
my birth. But I still entertain a hope that she may get over it.

We shall have a fortnight's respite from our Political Campaign. I
trust we shall do as well as we have done when Parliament meets again.
Believe me always, your devoted Niece,

    VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 11: Henry, Earl of Uxbridge, afterwards
    second Marquis of Anglesey (1797-1869).]

    [Footnote 12: Louisa Louis was born at Erbach in 1771.
    The Queen erected a tablet to her memory in St
    Martin's-in-the-Fields, where she is described as "the
    faithful and devoted friend of Princess Charlotte of Wales,
    and from earliest infancy honoured by the affectionate
    attachment of Her Majesty Queen Victoria." See Reminiscences,
    _ante_, p. 10. (Ch. I, 'Early Reminiscences')]




[Pageheading: PRINCE ALBERT'S EDUCATION]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

_13th April 1838._

... Concerning the education of our friend Albert, it has been
the best plan you could have fixed upon, to name Stockmar your
commissary-general; it will give _unité d'action et de l'ensemble_,
which otherwise we should not have had. I have communicated to him
what your uncle and the young gentleman seem to wish, and what strikes
me as the best for the moment. Stockmar will make a regular report to
you on this subject. They will return to Bonn at the beginning of May,
and remain till the end of August.... I agree with this, as nothing
enlarges the mind so much as travelling. But Stockmar will best treat
this affair verbally with you. The young gentlemen wished to pay me
another visit at the beginning of May, prior to their return to Bonn.
Nothing definite is, however, as yet settled about it. On one thing
you can rely, that it is my _great anxiety_ to see Albert a _very
good_ and _distinguished young man_, and _no pains will be thought too
much_ on my part if this end can be attained....




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

(_Undated._)

Your Majesty will perceive by this box, which I received this morning
but had not time to open, that Marshal Soult, Duke of Dalmatia,[13]
has been appointed Ambassador to the Coronation....

    [Footnote 13: Soult entered the French army in 1785, and
    became Marshal of France in 1804. After distinguishing himself
    at Austerlitz in 1805, he was made Duke of Dalmatia in 1807.
    Serving in the Peninsular War, he pursued Moore to Corunna,
    and became Commander-in-Chief in Spain in 1809. Subsequently
    he conducted the French retreat before Wellington in Southern
    France, 1813-14; was banished, but recalled and created a
    peer. He was Minister of War 1830-34.]




[Pageheading: OLD SERVANTS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _17th April 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--... You will by this time have learnt the _sad_
loss we have all sustained in the death of _dearest_, _faithful_,
_excellent_ Louie, who breathed her last, without a struggle or a
suffering, on Sunday night at nine o'clock. I don't think I have
_ever_ been so much overcome or distressed by anything, almost, as by
the death of this my earliest friend; it is the first link that has
been broken of my first and infantine affections. I always loved
Louie, and shall cherish her memory as that of the purest and best of
mortals as long as I live! I took leave of her before I left London on
Wednesday, and _never_, _never_ shall I forget the blessing she gave
me, and the grasp she gave my hand! I was quite upset by it! And I
feared and felt I should behold her on earth no more; it was, however,
a beautiful lesson of calmness and contentment and resignation to the
will of her God! Prepared as she was at every moment of her life to
meet her heavenly Father, she was full of hope of recovery, and quite
unconscious of her approaching end. You will, I am sure, dearest
Uncle, feel the loss of this excellent creature; I cannot restrain my
tears while writing this. One great consolation I have, which is, that
I have been the means of making her last days as happy as she could
wish to be, after having lost what she loved most!

... Poor _Mason_, our faithful coachman for so many years, is also
dead. These old servants cannot be replaced; and to see those whom one
has known from one's birth drop off, one by one, is melancholy! You
will think this letter a very sad one, but _I feel sad_....




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

MARLBOROUGH HOUSE, _17th April 1838._

... I can well enter into all your feelings of regret at the death of
one so truly attached and so faithful as dear old Louie had been to
you from your infancy, and I quite understand your grief; yet I feel
sure that you will also rejoice for her, that she has been relieved
from her earthly sufferings. For _her_ the change of existence was a
happy one; good and pious as she was, we may trust that her state at
present is one of felicity and bliss through the redeeming grace of
our Saviour....




[Pageheading: THE CORONATION]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

_17th April 1838._

... The Parliamentary affairs will, please Heaven, continue to go on
well; I am more than ever bound to wish it, as I am not anxious to
exchange my clever and well-informed friend Palmerston, with Lord
Aberdeen, for instance, of whose sweetness the Greek negotiation[14]
has given me very fair means of judging. Now I will conclude by
touching on one subject which concerns your great goodness to us.
When we left England you expressed a wish to see us at the time of the
Coronation, which was then believed to take place at the end of May.
More mature reflection has made me think that a King and Queen at your
dear Coronation might perhaps be a _hors-d'[oe]uvre_, and I think, if
it meets with your approbation, that it may be better to pay you our
respects at some other period, which you might like to fix upon. I do
not deny that having been deprived by circumstances from the happiness
of wishing you joy at your birthday, since 1831, in person, I feel
strongly tempted to make a short apparition to see you, as seeing and
speaking is much pleasanter than ink and paper....

    [Footnote 14: Referring to the offer of the throne of Greece
    to King Leopold in 1830.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _25th April 1838._

MY BELOVED UNCLE,--... With respect to the happiness of seeing you and
my dearest Aunt, I shall now respectfully state my feelings. It would
have made me very happy to see you both at the Coronation, but I think
upon the whole it is perhaps better you should not do so. Then, with
respect to your coming for my _old_ birthday, I must observe that I
could not enjoy you or my Aunt at all _à mon aise_. First of all, I
could not lodge you, and if one is not in the same house together,
there is _no real_ seeing one another; secondly, the town will be so
full of all sorts of foreigners that I should have _no peace_ to see
you and Aunt quietly. If therefore, dearest Uncle, it suits you and
Aunt Louise, would you come about the end of August, and stay with me
as long as you can? I trust, dearest Uncle, _que vous me comprendrez
bien_, and that you are assured of the great happiness it is for me to
see you at any time.

Since I have written to you we have received from Lord Granville the
news of Marshal Soult's appointment as Ambassador for the Coronation,
and of the Duc de Nemours' intention of coming here as a spectator.
You may be assured that I shall be delighted to see the Duke, as I
always am any of the dear French family. With regard to Soult, I
am sure you are aware that whoever the King chose to send would be
equally well received by me and the Government.




[Pageheading: THE TRAIN-BEARERS]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _5th May 1838._

The Queen sends the papers relating to the Coronation as Lord
Melbourne wished. The Queen also transmits the names of the young
ladies who she proposes should carry her train. If Lord Melbourne sees
any objection to any of these she hopes he will say so.

The Queen has put down Lady Mary Talbot, as being the daughter of the
oldest Earl in the Kingdom[15] and a Roman Catholic; and Lady Anne
Fitzwilliam, as she is anxious to show civility to Lord Fitzwilliam,
who has been very kind to the Queen.

Perhaps, when the names are agreed to, Lord Melbourne would kindly
undertake to speak or write to the parents of the young ladies
proposing it to them.

  Lady Caroline Lennox.
  Lady Adelaide Paget.
  Lady Fanny Cowper.
  Lady Wilhelmina Stanhope.
  Lady Mary Talbot.
  Lady Anne Fitzwilliam.
  Lady Mary Grimston.
  Lady Louisa Jenkinson.

    [Footnote 15: John, sixteenth Earl of Shrewsbury (1791-1852).]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_17th May 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thinks
that your Majesty had better direct Lord Conyngham to ask the
Archbishop, before the Audience, who has generally been there and how
it ought to be conducted.

Your Majesty had better read the Answer and not give it to the
Archbishop, as Lord Melbourne apprehends the Archbishop does not give
your Majesty the Address.

Your Majesty had better say something kind to each of the Bishops as
they are presented. They are presented to your Majesty in this manner
as a sort of privilege, instead of being presented at the Drawing-Room
with others, and your Majesty should conduct yourself towards them
exactly as if they had been presented in the usual circle. The time is
about half-past one, and your Majesty had better be punctual so as not
to delay the Drawing-Room.


[Pageheading: THE SLAVE TRADE]


_In the same letter is enclosed a draft of a letter which it was
suggested by Lord Melbourne that the Queen should write to the King of
Portugal, with regard to the suppression of the Slave Trade._

[Draft enclosed]

That you hope that the King and Queen of Portugal will not consider
the strong representations made by your Government on the subject of
the Slave Trade as arising from any desire to embarrass them. That
there is every disposition to make allowance for the difficulties
of Portugal, but allowance must also be made for the feelings of
the people of England; that those feelings on the Slave Trade are as
strong as they are just. That England has made great sacrifices
for the suppression of that crime, that she has made sacrifices to
Portugal, and that she has been extremely indignant at finding that
traffic so obstinately continued to be sheltered and protected under
the flag of Portugal. That Portugal must not expect that England will
much longer refrain from taking effectual measures for preventing
these practices. That you have spoken thus openly because you wish
them to be aware of the truth, and that you entreat both the Queen and
the King to use their power and influence in procuring such a treaty
to be concluded without delay, as will satisfy England and exonerate
Portugal from the reproach under which she now labours.

This is the substance of what might be written. It is perhaps a little
harshly worded, but your Majesty may soften it.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _25th May 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I am most thankful for your very kind letter, and
for the beautiful little sword, which delights me.

I have been dancing till past four o'clock this morning; we have had a
charming ball, and I have spent the happiest birthday that I have had
for many years; oh, _how_ different to last year! Everybody was so
kind and so friendly to me.

We have got a number of Austrians and Milanese here, among whom are
a Prince Odescalchi, and a Count Eugène Zichy, renowned for his
magnificent _turquoises_ and his famous valzing, a good-natured
_élégant_; we have also Esterhazy's daughter Marie--now Countess
Chorinsky--a Count and Countess Grippa, and a Marquis and Marchioness
of Trivalzi, etc.

Old Talleyrand[16] is at last dead. I hear he showed wonderful
composure and firmness to the last. He was one of those people who I
thought never would die. Did you know what Pozzo said to somebody here
about him? He said he (Talleyrand) would not die yet, "_parce que le
Diable ne voulait pas l'avoir_."

    [Footnote 16: Died 17th May, aged eighty-four.]




[Pageheading: INDEPENDENCE OF BELGIUM]

_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _2nd June 1838._

... I have not all this time touched on our affairs, from motives of
_great discretion_, but as the battle draws nigh,[17] I cannot very
well help writing a few words on the subject. I found an Article in
the French _Constitutionnel_ which paints our position in pretty true
colours. As it is not very long, I beg you to have the goodness to
read it. You have given me so many proofs of affection, and your kind
speech at Windsor is so fresh in my memory, that it would be _very
wrong_ in me to think that in so short a time, and without any cause,
those feelings which are so _precious_ to me could have changed. This
makes me appeal to those sentiments.

The independent existence of the Provinces which form this Kingdom has
always been an object of importance to England; the surest proof of
it is, that for centuries England has made the greatest sacrifices of
blood and treasure for that object. The last time I saw the late King
at Windsor, in 1836, he said to me: "If ever France or any other
Power invades your country, it will be a question of immediate war for
England; we cannot suffer that." I answered him I was happy to hear
him speak so, as I also did not want any foreign Power to invade
us....

All I want from your kind Majesty is, that you will _occasionally_
express to your Ministers, and particularly to good Lord Melbourne,
that, as far as it is _compatible_ with the interests _of your own_
dominions, you do _not_ wish that your Government should take
the _lead_ in such measures as might in a short time bring on the
_destruction_ of this country, as well as that of your uncle and his
family.

Europe has enjoyed ever since 1833, in our part of it, a state of
_profound peace_ and real happiness and prosperity. None can deny that
the measures which I adopted to organise this country have greatly
contributed to this happy state of affairs; this makes me think that
the changes which are to take place should be brought about in a _very
gentle manner_....

I am sorry to have you to listen to so much about politics, but it is
not my fault; I wished nothing so much as _to be left alone_. I shall
do all I can to bring about a good conclusion, but it must not be
forgotten that these seven years _all the dangers, all the trouble_,
fell constantly to _my share_....

Now I will make haste to conclude, and remain ever, my dearest
Victoria, your truly devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 17: The execution of the treaty of 1831, called the
    Twenty-four Articles, assigning part of Luxemburg to Holland,
    had been reluctantly agreed to by Leopold, but the King of
    Holland withheld his assent for seven years.]




[Pageheading: ANGLO-BELGIAN RELATIONS]

[Pageheading: PROGRESS OF BELGIUM]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _10th June 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--It is indeed a long while since I have written to
you, and I fear you will think me very lazy; but I must in turn say,
dearest Uncle, that your silence was longer than mine, and that it
grieved me, and _m'a beaucoup peinée_. I know, however, you have had,
and still have, _much_ to do. Many thanks, my dear Uncle, for your
very kind letter of the 2nd inst....

It would indeed, dearest Uncle, be _very wrong_ of you, if you thought
my feelings of warm and devoted attachment to you, and of great
affection for you, could be changed. _Nothing_ can ever change them!
Independent of my feelings of affection for you, my beloved Uncle, you
must be aware that the ancient and hereditary policy of this country
with respect to Belgium must make me most anxious that my Government
not _only_ should not be parties to any measure that would be
prejudicial to Belgium, but that my Ministers should, as far as may
not conflict with the interests or engagements of this country, do
_everything_ in their power to promote the prosperity and welfare of
your Kingdom.

My Ministers, I can assure you, share all my feelings on this subject,
and are most anxious to see everything settled in a satisfactory
manner between Belgium and Holland.

We all feel that we cannot sufficiently or adequately express how much
Belgium owes to your wise system of government, which has rendered
that country so flourishing in every way, and how much all Europe is
indebted to you for the preservation of general peace; because it is
certain that when you ascended the throne of Belgium that country
was the one from which the occasion of a general war was much to be
feared; whereas now it is become a link to secure the continuance of
peace; and by the happy circumstances of your double near relationship
to me and to the King of the French, _Belgium_--which was in former
times the cause of discord between England and France--becomes now a
mutual tie to keep them together.

This, my beloved Uncle, we owe to you, and it must be a source of
pride and gratification to you.

I perfectly understand and feel that your position with respect to all
these affairs is very difficult and trying, and the feelings of your
subjects are far from unnatural; yet I sincerely hope that you will
use the great influence you possess over the minds of the leading men
in Belgium, to mitigate discontent and calm irritation, and procure
acquiescence in whatever arrangements may ultimately be found
inevitable.

You are right in saying that I, though but a child of twelve years old
when you went to Belgium, remember much of what took place, and I have
since then had the whole matter fully explained to me. The Treaty of
November 1831 was perhaps not so advantageous to the Belgians as could
have been wished, yet it cannot have been thought very advantageous to
the Dutch, else they would have most probably urged their Government
before this time to accept it; besides, when these conditions were
framed, England was only one out of _five_ Powers whose concurrence
was required, and consequently they were made under very difficult
circumstances. This treaty having been ratified, it is become binding,
and therefore it is almost impossible to consider it as otherwise,
and to set aside those parts of it which have been ratified by all the
parties.

I feel I must in turn, dearest Uncle, entreat your indulgence for so
long a letter, and for such full explanations, but I felt it my duty
to do so, as you had spoken to me on the subject.

You may be assured, my beloved Uncle, that both Lord Melbourne and
Lord Palmerston are most anxious at all times for the prosperity and
welfare of Belgium, and are consequently most desirous of seeing this
difficult question brought to a conclusion which may be satisfactory
to you. Allow me once more therefore, dearest Uncle, to beseech you
to use your powerful influence over your subjects, and to strive to
moderate their excited feelings on these matters. Your situation is a
very difficult one, and nobody feels more for you than I do.

I trust, dearest Uncle, that you will, at all times, believe me your
devoted and most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: FOREIGN POLICY]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _June [18] 1838._

MY DEAREST AND MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--You have written me a _very
dear_ and long letter, which has given me _great pleasure and
satisfaction_. I was much moved with the expressions of truly felt
affection, which it contains, and I shall _never_ again doubt your
affection for me, but rely on your dear heart and the constancy of
your character.

I will now tell you honestly that I had some misgivings; I did not
exactly think that you had quite forgotten me, but I thought I had
been put aside as one does with a piece of furniture which is no
longer wanted. I did not complain, because I fear if affection is once
on the decline, reproaches only diminish it the faster. I therefore
said nothing, but in a life full of grief and disappointments like
mine, the loss of your affection would have been one of the most
severe. It was in this point of view that the declaration made by
Lord Palmerston at the beginning of May to the Prussian Government
chagrined me much.[19] It was premature, because the negotiation
was not yet renewed. It looked as if the English Government had
been anxious to say to the Northern Powers, who always steadfastly
_protected_ Holland, "You imagine, perhaps, that we mean to have
_égards_ for the uncle of the Queen; there you see we shall make even
shorter work with him now than we did under our late master."

This impression had been _general_ on the Continent; they considered
the declaration to Prussia in this way: "La Reine et ses Ministres
sont donc entièrement indifférents sur le compte du Roi L.; _cela
change entièrement_ la position, et nous allons faire mains basses sur
lui." From that moment their language became extremely imperious;
they spoke of nothing but acts of coercion, bombardment, etc., etc. I
firmly believe, because I have been these many years on terms of great
and sincere friendship with Palmerston, that he did not himself quite
foresee the importance which would be attached to his declaration. I
must say it hurt me more in my _English_ capacity than in my Belgian,
as I came to this country _from England_, and was chosen _for that
very reason_. Besides, I am happy to say, I was never as yet in the
position to ask for any act of kindness from you, so that whatever
little service I may have rendered you, remained on a basis of perfect
disinterestedness. That the first diplomatic step in our affairs
should seem by your Government to be directed against me, created
therefore all over the Continent a considerable sensation. I shall
never ask any favours of you, or anything that could in the least be
considered as _incompatible_ with the interests of England; but you
will comprehend that there is a great difference in claiming favours
and in being treated as an enemy....

I will conclude my overgrown letter with the assurance that you
never were in greater favour, and that I love you dearly. Believe me,
therefore, ever, my best beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 18: The day of the month is not given.]

    [Footnote 19: Prussia was giving unmistakable evidence of a
    disposition to support Holland against Belgium.]




[Pageheading: THE CORONATION]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

MARLBORO' HOUSE, _28th June 1838._ (_At a quarter before 12 o'clock on
the Coronation Day._)

MY DEAREST NIECE,--The guns are just announcing your approach to the
Abbey, and as I am not near you, and cannot take part in the sacred
ceremony of your Coronation, I must address you in writing to assure
you that my thoughts and my whole heart are with you, and my prayers
are offered up to Heaven for your happiness, and the prosperity and
glory of your reign. May our Heavenly Father bless and preserve you,
and His Holy Ghost dwell within you to give you that peace which the
world cannot give! Accept of these my best wishes, and the blessing of
your most devoted and attached Aunt,

ADELAIDE.




_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Thursday, 28th June 1838._

I was awoke at four o'clock by the guns in the Park, and could not get
much sleep afterwards on account of the noise of the people, bands,
etc., etc. Got up at seven, feeling strong and well; the Park
presented a curious spectacle, crowds of people up to Constitution
Hill, soldiers, bands, etc. I dressed, having taken a little breakfast
before I dressed, and a little after. At half-past 9 I went into the
next room, dressed exactly in my House of Lords costume; and met Uncle
Ernest, Charles,[20] and Feodore (who had come a few minutes before
into my dressing-room), Lady Lansdowne, Lady Normanby, the Duchess of
Sutherland, and Lady Barham, all in their robes.

    [Footnote 20: Prince Charles of Leiningen, the Queen's
    half-brother.]




[Pageheading: THE ABBEY]


At 10 I got into the State Coach with the Duchess of Sutherland and
Lord Albemarle and we began our Progress. I subjoin a minute account
of the whole Procession and of the whole Proceeding,--the route, etc.
It was a fine day, and the crowds of people exceeded what I have ever
seen; many as there were the day I went to the City, it was nothing,
nothing to the multitudes, the millions of my loyal subjects, who were
assembled _in every spot_ to witness the Procession. Their good humour
and excessive loyalty was beyond everything, and I really cannot say
_how_ proud I feel to be the Queen of _such_ a Nation. I was alarmed
at times for fear that the people would be crushed and squeezed on
account of the tremendous rush and pressure.

I reached the Abbey amid deafening cheers at a little after half-past
eleven; I first went into a robing-room quite close to the entrance
where I found my eight train-bearers: Lady Caroline Lennox, Lady
Adelaide Paget, Lady Mary Talbot, Lady Fanny Cowper, Lady Wilhelmina
Stanhope, Lady Anne Fitzwilliam, Lady Mary Grimston, and Lady Louisa
Jenkinson--all dressed alike and beautifully in white satin and silver
tissue with wreaths of silver corn-ears in front, and a small one of
pink roses round the plait behind, and pink roses in the trimming of
the dresses.

After putting on my mantle, and the young ladies having properly
got hold of it and Lord Conyngham holding the end of it, I left the
robing-room and the Procession began as is described in the annexed
account, and all that followed and took place. The sight was splendid;
the bank of Peeresses quite beautiful all in their robes, and the
Peers on the other side. My young train-bearers were always near me,
and helped me whenever I wanted anything. The Bishop of Durham[21]
stood on the side near me, but he was, as Lord Melbourne told me,
remarkably _maladroit_, and never could tell me what was to take
place. At the beginning of the Anthem, where I've made a mark, I
retired to St Edward's Chapel, a dark small place immediately behind
the Altar, with my ladies and train-bearers--took off my crimson robe
and kirtle, and put on the supertunica of cloth of gold, also in the
shape of a kirtle, which was put over a singular sort of little gown
of linen trimmed with lace; I also took off my circlet of diamonds and
then proceeded bareheaded into the Abbey; I was then seated upon St
Edward's chair, where the Dalmatic robe was clasped round me by the
Lord Great Chamberlain. Then followed all the various things; and last
(of those things) the Crown being placed on my head--which was, I must
own, a most beautiful impressive moment; _all_ the Peers and Peeresses
put on their coronets at the same instant.

    [Footnote 21: Edward Maltby, 1770-1859.]

My excellent Lord Melbourne, who stood very close to me throughout
the whole ceremony, was _completely_ overcome at this moment, and
very much affected; he gave me _such_ a kind, and I may say _fatherly_
look. The shouts, which were very great, the drums, the trumpets, the
firing of the guns, all at the same instant, rendered the spectacle
most imposing.


[Pageheading: HOMAGE]

The Enthronisation and the Homage of, first, all the Bishops, and then
my Uncles, and lastly of all the Peers, in their respective order
was very fine. The Duke of Norfolk (holding for me the Sceptre with a
Cross) with Lord Melbourne stood close to me on my right, and the
Duke of Richmond with the other Sceptre on my left, etc., etc. All my
train-bearers, etc., standing behind the Throne. Poor old Lord Rolle,
who is 82, and dreadfully infirm, in attempting to ascend the steps
fell and rolled quite down, but was not the least hurt; when he
attempted to re-ascend them I got up and advanced to the end of the
steps, in order to prevent another fall. When Lord Melbourne's turn to
do Homage came, there was loud cheering; they also cheered Lord Grey
and the Duke of Wellington; it's a pretty ceremony; they first all
touch the Crown, and then kiss my hand. When my good Lord Melbourne
knelt down and kissed my hand, he pressed my hand and I grasped his
with all my heart, at which he looked up with his eyes filled with
tears and seemed much touched, as he was, I observed, throughout the
whole ceremony. After the Homage was concluded I left the Throne, took
off my Crown and received the Sacrament; I then put on my Crown again,
and re-ascended the Throne, leaning on Lord Melbourne's arm. At the
commencement of the Anthem I descended from the Throne, and went into
St Edward's Chapel with my Ladies, Train-bearers, and Lord Willoughby,
where I took off the Dalmatic robe, supertunica, etc., and put on the
Purple Velvet Kirtle and Mantle, and proceeded again to the Throne,
which I ascended leaning on Lord Melbourne's hand.

There was another most dear Being present at this ceremony, in the
box immediately above the royal box, and who witnessed all; it was my
dearly beloved angelic Lehzen, whose eyes I caught when on the Throne,
and we exchanged smiles. She and Späth, Lady John Russell, and Mr.
Murray saw me leave the Palace, arrive at the Abbey, leave the Abbey
and again return to the Palace!!


[Pageheading: POPULAR ENTHUSIASM]

I then again descended from the Throne, and repaired with all the
Peers bearing the Regalia, my Ladies and Train-bearers, to St Edward's
Chapel, as it is called; but which, as Lord Melbourne said, was
more _un_like a Chapel than anything he had ever seen; for what was
_called_ an _Altar_ was covered with sandwiches, bottles of wine,
etc., etc. The Archbishop came in and _ought_ to have delivered
the Orb to me, but I had already got it, and he (as usual) was _so_
confused and puzzled and knew nothing, and--went away. Here we waited
some minutes. Lord Melbourne took a glass of wine, for he seemed
completely tired. The Procession being formed, I replaced my Crown
(which I had taken off for a few minutes), took the Orb in my left
hand and the Sceptre in my right, and thus _loaded_, proceeded through
the Abbey--which resounded with cheers, to the first robing-room;
where I found the Duchess of Gloucester, Mamma, and the Duchess of
Cambridge with their Ladies. And here we waited for at least an hour,
with _all_ my ladies and train-bearers; the Princesses went away about
half an hour before I did. The Archbishop had (most awkwardly) put
the ring on the wrong finger, and the consequence was that I had the
greatest difficulty to take it off again, which I at last did with
great pain. Lady Fanny, Lady Wilhelmina, and Lady Mary Grimston looked
quite beautiful. At about half-past four I re-entered my carriage,
the Crown on my head, and the Sceptre and Orb in my hands, and we
proceeded the same way as we came--the crowds if possible having
increased. The enthusiasm, affection, and loyalty were really
touching, and I shall ever remember this day as the _Proudest_ of my
life! I came home at a little after six, really _not_ feeling tired.


[Pageheading: INCIDENTS OF THE CORONATION]

At eight we dined. Besides we thirteen--my Uncles, sister, brother,
Späth, and the Duke's gentlemen--my excellent Lord Melbourne and Lord
Surrey dined here. Lord Melbourne came up to me and said: "I must
congratulate you on this most brilliant day," and that all had gone
off so well. He said he was not tired, and was in high spirits. I
sat between Uncle Ernest[22] and Lord Melbourne; and Lord Melbourne
between me and Feodore, whom he had led in. My kind Lord Melbourne was
much affected in speaking of the whole ceremony. He asked kindly if I
was tired; said the Sword he carried (the first, the Sword of State)
was excessively heavy. I said that the Crown hurt me a good deal. He
was so much amused at Uncle Ernest's being astonished at our still
having the Litany. We agreed that the whole thing was a very fine
sight. He thought the robes, and particularly the Dalmatic, "looked
remarkably well." "And you did it all so well--excellent!" said he,
with tears in his eyes. He said he thought I looked rather pale and
"moved by all the people" when I arrived; "and that's natural;
and that's better." The Archbishop's and Dean's copes, which were
remarkably handsome, were from James the Second's time; the very same
that were worn at his Coronation, Lord Melbourne told me. Spoke of the
Bishop of Durham's awkwardness, Lord Rolle's fall, etc. Of the Duc
de Nemours being like his father in face; of the young ladies'
(train-bearers') dresses; which he thought beautiful; and he said
he thought the Duchess of Richmond (who had ordered the make of the
dresses, etc., and had been much condemned by some of the young ladies
for it) quite right. She said to him: "One thing I was determined
about; that I would have no discussion with their Mammas about it."
Spoke of Talleyrand and Soult having been very much struck by the
ceremony of the Coronation; of the English being far too generous
_not_ to be kind to Soult. Lord Melbourne went home the night before,
and slept very deeply till he was woke at six in the morning. I said I
did not sleep well. Spoke of the Illuminations and Uncle Ernest's wish
to see them.

    [Footnote 22: The King of Hanover.]

After dinner, before we sat down, we (that is Charles, Lord Melbourne,
and I) spoke of the numbers of Peers at the Coronation, which, Lord
Melbourne said, with the tears in his eyes, was unprecedented. I
observed that there were very few Viscounts; he said: "There are very
few Viscounts," that they were an odd sort of title and not really
English; that they came from _Vice-Comités_; that Dukes and Barons
were the only _real_ English titles; that Marquises were likewise not
English; and that they made people Marquises when they did not wish to
make them Dukes. Spoke of Lord Audley who came as the First Baron, and
who Lord Melbourne said was a very odd young man, but of a very old
family; his ancestor was a Sir Something Audley in the time of the
Black Prince, who, with Chandos, gained the Battle of Poictiers.

I then sat on the sofa for a little while with Lady Barham and then
with Charles; Lord Melbourne sitting near me the whole evening. Mamma
and Feodore remained to see the illuminations and only came in later,
and Mamma went away before I did. Uncle Ernest drove out to see the
Illuminations.


[Pageheading: PAGES OF HONOUR]

I said to Lord Melbourne when I first sat down that I felt a little
tired on my feet; "You must be very tired," he said. Spoke of the
weight of the Robes, etc., etc., the Coronets; and he turned round to
me with the tears in his eyes, and said _so_ kindly: "And you did it
beautifully--every part of it, with so much taste; it's a thing that
you can't give a person advice upon; it must be left to a person."
To hear this, from this kind impartial friend, gave me great and real
pleasure. Mamma and Feodore came back just after he said this. Spoke
of the Bishops' Copes, about which he was very funny; of the Pages who
were such a nice set of boys, and who were so handy, Lord Melbourne
said, that they kept them the whole time. Little Lord Stafford and
Slane (Lord Mountcharles) were pages to their fathers and looked
lovely; Lord Paget (not a fine boy) was Lord Melbourne's page and
remarkably handy, he said. Spoke again of the young ladies' dresses,
about which he was very amusing; he waited for his carriage with Lady
Mary Talbot and Lady Wilhelmina; he thinks Lady Fanny does not make as
much show as other girls, which I would not allow. He set off for the
Abbey from his house at half-past eight, and was there long before
anybody else; he only got home at half-past six and had to go round
by Kensington. He said there was a large breakfast in the Jerusalem
Chamber where they met _before_ all began; he said, laughing, that
whenever the Clergy, or a Dean and Chapter, had anything to do with
anything, there's sure to be plen'y to eat.

Spoke of my intending to go to bed, etc.; he said, "You may depend
upon it, you are more tired than you think you are." I said I had
slept badly the night before; he said that was my mind, that nothing
kept people more awake than any consciousness of a great event going
to take place, and being agitated. He was not sure if he was not going
to the Duke of Wellington's.

Stayed in the dining room till twenty minutes past eleven, but
remained on Mamma's balcony looking at the fireworks in Green Park,
which were quite beautiful.

Uncle Ernest, Charles, Feodore, and the Ladies and Gentlemen (like
Lehzen, etc.) saw me leave the Palace, arrive at the Abbey, leave the
Abbey, and return to the Palace. Got a long letter from Aunt Louise.




[Pageheading: EXTRA HOLIDAYS FOR SCHOOLS]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _29th June 1838._

The Queen is very anxious to hear if Lord Melbourne got home safe, and
if he is not tired, and quite well this morning.

Lord Melbourne will be glad to hear that the Queen had an excellent
night, is not the least tired, and is perfectly well this morning;
indeed she feels much better than she has done for some days.

The Queen hears that it is usual to ask for an additional week's
holiday for the boys at the various Public Schools, on the occasion
of the Coronation. Perhaps Lord Melbourne will enquire about this, in
order that there may be no neglect on my part.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _2nd July 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--_Many_ thanks for _two_ kind letters, one which I
got last Monday and one this morning. The kind interest you take in
me and my country (of which, and of the nation, I'm more proud than I
ever was, since I've witnessed their excessive affection and
loyalty to me) makes me certain that you will be glad to hear how
_beautifully_ everything went off. It was a memorable and glorious day
for me. The millions assembled to witness the progress to and from the
Abbey was _beyond_ belief, and _all_ in the highest good-humour. It
is a fine ceremony, and a scene I shall _ever_ remember, and with
pleasure. I likewise venture to add that people thought I did my part
very well.

The amiable Duc de Nemours dined with me on Friday, comes to _my_ ball
to-night, and dines again with me on Wednesday. Pray tell dearest Aunt
Louise that I thank her much for her very kind letter, and will avail
myself of her kindness and _not_ write to her this mail.

Feodore is writing in my room, well and happy. Uncle Ernest still very
lame, and Charles well. There's an account of the family. Ever and
ever your most devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_8th July 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. As your
Majesty does not ride, the question is between driving down the line
or not going down it at all,[23] and it appears to Lord Melbourne
that the first is the best, namely, to drive down; but if your Majesty
feels a strong repugnance, there is no more to be said.

Lord Melbourne thinks it safer and more prudent that your Majesty
should not ride; but still it might have been done, and if Lord
Melbourne had thought that your Majesty wished it much, he would not
have dissuaded it.

[Footnote 23: Referring to the Hyde Park review on the next day.]




[Pageheading: LOYAL DEMONSTRATIONS]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _12th July 1838._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I am very grateful for your kind letter; it
is extremely _meritorious_, amidst such fatigues and festivities and
occupations of every kind, to find a moment to write. I expressed
already the _great satisfaction_ with which I read and heard all
the accounts of the Coronation, and I believe that there _never_ was
anything like it. The only one which in point of loyal demonstration
may approach it is that of George III., but I think it fell short of
yours.

I am happy to see that it has _increased_, if possible, your affection
and attachment to your country, and this is in every respect a great
blessing. You will remember that I have never varied on that subject,
the great thing is to be the _National_ Sovereign of your _own_
country, and to love its very faults. This strengthens the _mutual
attachment_, and that can _never be too strong_....

Believe me, ever, my dearest Victoria, your very devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

The whole of the family here offer their best _hommages_.




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _20th July 1838._

I feel most grateful for your dear kind letter of the 10th inst.,
which I received a few days ago. I hear that the review was something
_most splendid_, and I feel always some regret at having been deprived
of the happiness of seeing you _en fonction_, which you do in a degree
of rare perfection. May the remembrance of all this long remain in
your mind, to cheer and strengthen you when occasionally there will be
a darker sky....




[Pageheading: LORD DURHAM]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_10th August 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. The very
difficult and embarrassing situation in which Lord Durham and the
Canadas and the Ministry are left by the vote of the House of Lords
of last night, requires that a Cabinet should be held to-day, and Lord
Melbourne has directed one to be summoned at two. Lord Melbourne will
wait upon your Majesty either before that hour or after, about four
o'clock. The vote of last night and the Bill of Lord Brougham[24] is
a direct censure upon Lord Durham. Lord Durham's conduct has been most
rash and indiscreet, and, as far as we can see, unaccountable. But to
censure him now would either be to cause his resignation, which would
produce great embarrassment, and might produce great evil, or to
weaken his authority, which is evidently most undesirable....

    [Footnote 24: This Bill (which emphasised the illegality of
    Lord Durham's ordinance) was read a second time by 54 to 36.
    On the following day Lord Melbourne announced to the Peers
    that Ministers had resolved to advise that the ordinance
    should be disallowed.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_10th August 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
inform you that the Cabinet have determined to advise your Majesty
to disallow Lord Durham's ordinance, and to announce the same to the
House of Lords.[25]

This is absolutely necessary, but very disagreeable, and will be very
much so to Lord Durham.

    [Footnote 25: _See_ Introductory Note for the year, _ante_, p. 102.
      (Introductory Note to Ch. VII)]




_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

_25th September 1838._

MY MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--I can never thank you enough for the dear
letter which I found on my table on arriving here, Sunday evening. It
was most kind of you to have written so soon after our departure, and
such an affectionate, good, kind letter. The tears came to my eyes
as I read it, and I felt quite moved. Short as has been our stay,
and great, as always, the pain of leaving you, it has been a _great
happiness_ for me to see you again, a happiness for which I shall
always thank God, you, and your dear Uncle. I need not add how _very
precious_ is your affection to me, and how _very grateful_ I am for
every new proof of it. You know my feelings on this point, and
you know they are better _felt_ than _expressed_. Your calling me
_Louise_, and in such a kind way, gave me great pleasure. Almost all
those dear to me call me so, and I think it looks more affectionate;
I would fain say now _sister-like_, although I am rather an old sister
for you now....

Leopold is half crazy with the steam-engine, and particularly with
the _tools_ which you sent him. I enclose here the expression of his
gratitude. I wrote exactly what he told me to write, and I did not add
a word. He has found again his kie (key), and he wears it suspended
to his neck by a blue riband, with the Duchess's little seal. He felt
deeply the attention you had to have an _L_ engraved on each tool, and
after his letter was closed he charged me to thank you for it, and
to tell you that it gave him great pleasure. An _iron spade_ was the
greatest object of his ambition, and he worked so hard yesterday with
it, that I feared he would hurt himself with the exertion. He will go
to-day to the races with us, in the Scotch dress which the Duchess had
the kindness to send him. It fits very well, and he is very proud of
having a coat shaped _like that of a man_....




[Pageheading: IRELAND AND O'CONNELL]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_25th October 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty....

Mr Stanley of the Treasury[26] arrived in London yesterday, and
acquaints me that Lord Normanby makes no secret of his willingness,
and indeed his desire, to undertake the government of Canada. It
would have been better if Lord Normanby had acquainted Lord Melbourne
quietly of this, and not made it at once public to all the world. It
is not necessary to do anything at present. If Lord Durham remains,
which Lord Melbourne does not, however, think likely, there will be
no successor to be appointed, and if he returns, the authority of
Governor of Lower Canada will devolve upon Sir John Colborne,[27] in
whose hands it may be very safely left for the present.

If Ireland should be vacant, there is a strong feeling amongst many
that it would be nice to name the Duke of Sussex. It is said that it
would be popular in Ireland, that the name of one of the Royal Family
would do good there, and that it would afford to O'Connell a pretext
and opportunity for giving up his new scheme of agitation. It is also
added that the Duke would suffer himself to be guided on all essential
matters by the advice of his Chief Secretary, and that he would
content himself with discharging the ceremonial duties. Here are the
reasons for it--your Majesty is so well acquainted with the reasons on
the other side, that it is unnecessary for me to detail them.

I am afraid that times of some trouble are approaching, for which
your Majesty must hold yourself prepared; but your Majesty is too well
acquainted with the nature of human affairs not to be well aware
that they cannot very well go on even as quietly as they have gone on
during the last sixteen months.

[Footnote 26: "Ben" Stanley, afterwards Lord Stanley of Alderley,
Secretary to the Treasury.]

[Footnote 27: Field-Marshal Sir John Colborne, afterwards Lord Seaton,
had been Military Secretary to Sir John Moore, had commanded a brigade
with much distinction in the Peninsula, and had contributed greatly to
the success of the British arms at Waterloo.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_4th November 1838._

Lord Melbourne is very well, but Sir James Clark,[28] a Scotchman and
a physician, and therefore neither by country nor by profession very
religious, detained him from Church in order to go through the report
upon the state of Buckingham Palace. This is not a very good excuse,
but it is the true one. Lord Melbourne is very grateful to your
Majesty for your enquiries, and having some letters to submit, will be
happy to attend upon your Majesty.

    [Footnote 28: Physician-in-Ordinary to the Queen.]




[Pageheading: DEATH OF LADY JOHN RUSSELL]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _6th November 1838._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--.... We have all been much distressed by the
melancholy and untimely death of poor Lady John Russell,[29] which
took place on the 1st. She was safely confined on the 20th of October
with a little girl, who bears my name, and seemed to be going on very
well; but on Wednesday she began to sink from weakness, not disease,
and died at three o'clock on Thursday. It is a dreadful blow to _him_,
for he was _so_ attached to her, and I don't believe two people ever
were happier together. I send you his pretty letter to me, which I
think you may be interested to see; he is _dreadfully_ beat down by
it, but struggles manfully against his grief, which makes one pity him
more. She has left four children by her first husband, _now orphans_,
the eldest a sweet girl twelve years old, and two little girls by Lord
John; the eldest of these two is two and a half, and the youngest a
_fortnight_. I had known her _very_ well and liked her, and I assure
you I was dreadfully shocked at it. You may also imagine what a loss
she is to poor Miss Lister, who has no mother, and whose only sister
she was. I fear, dear Uncle, I have made a sad and melancholy letter
of this, but I have been so much engrossed by all this misery, and
knowing you take an interest in poor Lord John, that I let my pen run
on almost involuntarily.

We have very good accounts of the Queen-Dowager from Gibraltar.

Please return me Lord John's letter when you have done with it.

Lord and Lady Howard[30] have been here, and I urged him to _bear_
Dietz as an inevitable evil, and I think he seems very anxious to do
what is right. I have likewise written to Ferdinand, urging _him_ and
Dietz to be reasonable.

Will you tell Aunt Louise that she will receive a box containing the
Limerick lace dress (just like mine), which I lay at her feet. I
fear, dear Uncle, you will think I'm making you my commissioner _de
toilette_, as in these two letters I have plagued you with commissions
on that subject....

    [Footnote 29: Daughter of Mr Thomas Lister. She had been widow
    of the second Lord Ribblesdale, and married Lord John Russell
    in April 1835.]

    [Footnote 30: Charles Augustus, sixth Lord Howard de Walden,
    was the British Minister at Lisbon, and afterwards (1846-1868)
    at Brussels.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _9th November 1838._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--Your kind and interesting letter of the
6th reached me yesterday morning. I hail in you those simple and
unaffected feelings which it contains. May you _always_ preserve that
great warmth and truth of character which you now possess, and rest
assured that it will be an ornament to you, and the means of finding
the same truth and warmth of feeling in others. Those who serve, from
whatever motive it may be, have always their eyes wide open on their
superiors, and no qualities impose so much on them the necessity of
respect, which they _gladly avoid_, than a warm and noble character
that knows how to feel for others, and how to sympathise with their
sorrows. I pity Lord John from all my heart, having always had for him
sentiments of the sincerest regard. I fear that as a political man it
may prove also a severe blow. All depends on how he takes it, if he
will wish to forget his grief by occupying himself with political
strife or if his greater sensibility will make him wish to indulge it
in solitude....




[Pageheading: LORD JOHN RUSSELL]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _12th November 1838._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I was certain you _would_ take interest in and feel
for poor Lord John; he is, I hear, still dreadfully shaken, and quite
unequal to do any business at present. His chief consolation is in
attending to the children.

I felt much for you, and still more for poor dear Aunt Louise, when
the sad separation from poor Marie[31] took place; it is so melancholy
to see a dear relation depart who is _so ill_.

I have this morning heard from Ferdinand that the good Queen is
at last confined, after keeping us for _two months_ and _more dans
l'attente_ of the event. It took place on the 3rd, and Ferdinand
writes such a funny letter, saying, "nous sommes tous bien heureux
surtout moi qui craignais que ce ne fût une petite fille ce qui m'eût
été un peu désagréable, car en fait d'enfants j'aime mieux les petits
garçons, parce qu'ils sont plus gais et plus tapageurs."[32] Isn't
this very good?

I believe the King of the French is to be godfather....

    [Footnote 31: See _post_, p. 144. (Ch. VIII, 11th January, 1839)]

    [Footnote 32: The Prince received the title of Duke of
    Oporto.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_20th November 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and transmits
a copy of Mr. Macaulay's letter.[33]...

Lord Melbourne fears, from what he hears of the language of Lord
Howick and Mr. Monson, that much difficulty will be found in making
arrangements and deciding upon questions. But Lord Melbourne will use
every effort in his power in order to keep the Administration together
and to carry on the public service. Lord Melbourne hears with concern
from Mr Fox Maule that Lord John Russell does not return to business
as readily as Mr Maule had hoped that he would, and Lord Melbourne
fears that he will not do whilst he remains at Cassiobury with
the children. Solitude and retirement cherish and encourage grief.
Employment and exertion are the only means of dissipating it.

    [Footnote 33: Declining to join the Government. The original
    is not preserved among the Queen's papers.]




[Pageheading: CANADA AND LORD DURHAM]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_22nd November 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
acknowledge your Majesty's gracious communication received yesterday.
Lord Melbourne had nothing particular to lay before your Majesty, but
still regrets that he did not write, as your Majesty might have wished
to hear from him.

Lord Melbourne returns the King of Portugal's[34] letter, which, as
your Majesty observes, is very rough and ill-tempered with reference
to Lord Howard.[35] Lord Melbourne read it with much concern, as it
shows so much dislike and alienation, as renders it very improbable
that they should ever go on together well and in a friendly spirit.
Lord Melbourne fears that the epithets applied to Lord Howard, though
very severe and full of resentment, are not entirely ill-chosen and
inappropriate.

All the Ministers, except Lord Duncannon[36] and Lord John Russell,
dined here yesterday, and they all appeared to be in very good-humour
and disposed to co-operate in order to meet the difficulties by which
we are surrounded....

With respect to Canada, Lord Melbourne feels that it may be considered
somewhat presumptuous in him to undervalue danger, which is considered
by those upon the spot to be so great and so imminent, but still he
cannot feel the alarm which seems to be felt there. Lord Durham, Lord
Melbourne is convinced, exaggerates the peril in order to give greater
_éclat_ to his own departure. The worst symptom which Lord Melbourne
perceives is the general fear which seems to prevail there, and which
makes every danger ten times as great as it really is.

    [Footnote 34: The birth of an heir on 16th September 1837
    conferred on Prince Ferdinand the right to the title of King.]

    [Footnote 35: See _ante_, p. 131. (Ch VII, Footnote 30)]

    [Footnote 36: Lord Duncannon (1781-1847), at this time Lord
    Privy Seal and First Commissioner of Woods and Forests,
    was afterwards (as Earl of Bessborough) Lord-Lieutenant of
    Ireland. He must not be confused with the Lord Dungannon who
    sat in the House of Commons as Mr Hill-Trevor from 1830-1841,
    and, as Viscount Dungannon, was elected in 1843, but
    immediately unseated on petition.]




[Pageheading: BELGIUM AND ENGLAND]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _24th November 1838._

MY DEAR VICTORIA,--Van Praet[37] is bearer of this letter. The
present moment being one of some importance--which may, if imprudently
managed, cause great disturbances in the West of Europe, and exercise
a reaction on your own Government--I think it my duty to inform you
of what is going on.

I join a copy of a letter to Lord Palmerston. I should feel obliged to
you if you would read it _in the presence_ of good Lord Melbourne,
in whose fairness and sense of justice I must say I feel great
confidence....

I will not complain, only one subject I must touch upon as really very
unfair. That your Ministers should take a line unfavourable to this
country may be explained by their political position, but why should
they press so much on the French Government? I really see no cause for
it. England is in an _excellent_ position for a _mediator_, and
for all parties it is highly desirable that that position should be
maintained.[38]

I will not plague with a longer letter. You know from experience that
I _never ask anything of you._ I prefer remaining in the position of
having rendered services without wanting any return for it but your
affection; but, as I said before, if we are not careful we may see
serious consequences which may affect more or less everybody, and
_this_ ought to be the object of our most anxious attention. I remain,
my dear Victoria, your affectionate Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 37: Jules van Praet, author of a History of
    Flanders, was Secretary of the Belgian Legation in London in
    1831, and took a leading part in the negotiations which placed
    King Leopold on the throne.]

    [Footnote 38: King Leopold considered that the interests of
    Belgium were being neglected by the four Powers, and in his
    speech at the opening of his Parliament, on 13th November,
    stated amid loud acclamations that those interests would
    be defended with perseverance and courage. The Deputies, in
    reply, said that Belgium had consented to painful sacrifices
    only under a formal guarantee by the Powers, which they now
    shrank from carrying out.]




[Pageheading: BELGIUM AND HOLLAND]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_2nd December 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and returns
this letter with the enclosures. He has read it and them with great
attention. Your Majesty will probably think it right to acquaint the
King that your Majesty had already seen his letter to Lord Palmerston.

Lord Melbourne cannot perceive the justice of the King's complaint.
For the sake of the King himself and of the Belgian nation, we are
most anxious to settle speedily and definitely the questions so
long pending between Belgium and Holland, and which arose from the
separation of the two countries in 1830. We can only settle it by the
agreement of the four Great Powers who constitute the Conference to
which the question was referred, viz., Austria, Prussia, England,
France. Of course it is of vital importance for us to carry them all
along with us, and for that reason we press France. If she differs
from us, there is a ground immediately laid for difference and war.

Lord Melbourne would suggest that your Majesty should say "that
your great affection for the King, as well as your anxiety for the
interests of your own country, and your desire for the promotion
of peace, render you most solicitous to have the Belgian question
speedily and definitively settled; that it appears to you that it can
only be settled by the agreement of the four Powers who constitute the
Conference, and that therefore you cannot but wish most strongly to
carry France as well as the two others along with you."[39]

    [Footnote 39: See the Queen's letter of 5th December to the
    King of the Belgians.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_3rd December 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
to acquaint that as soon as he arrived at half-past two, Sir George
Grey[40] ran in to acquaint him that the whole insurrection in Canada
was put down and suppressed.[41] Despatches have been received from
Sir John Colborne to say that the British turned out with the utmost
alacrity, the volunteers beat the French wherever they met them, the
whole are dispersed, and Sir John says that he feels no doubt of the
tranquillity of the Colony during the rest of the winter. Unless,
therefore, the Americans make an attempt upon Upper Canada, all is
well. Lord Melbourne will have the pleasure of returning to Windsor
to-morrow, unless there should be any impediment, of which Lord
Melbourne will inform your Majesty.

    [Footnote 40: Sir George Grey (1799-1882), at this time
    Under-Secretary for the Colonies, afterwards Secretary of
    State successively for Home and Colonial Affairs.]

    [Footnote 41: On the 3rd of November, however, the
    insurrection had broken out anew in Lower Canada, while
    in Upper Canada many American "sympathyzers" joined the
    insurgents there; these were decisively defeated at Prescott.
    This fight cost the British 45 in killed and wounded; 159 of
    their opponents (including 131 natives of the United
    States) were taken, and conveyed to Kingston, to be tried by
    court-martial.]




[Pageheading: BELGIAN AFFAIRS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _5th December 1838._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I have to thank you for two letters, one brought by
Van Praet, and the other received on Tuesday. Before I proceed further
I must tell you that both Lord Melbourne and I had already seen
your letter to Lord Palmerston, which he sent to us immediately on
receiving it. I have read these letters with the greatest attention,
and can quite understand that your difficulties are great in trying to
restrain the eagerness and violence of some of your people.

My great affection for you, of course, makes me most anxious to see
these troublesome and long pending affairs settled, for the sake of a
continuance of peace and tranquillity; but, dear Uncle, as it appears
to me that these affairs can only be settled by the agreement of the
four Powers, it is absolutely necessary that France should go with
us as well as the others, and I think, dear Uncle, you wrong us in
thinking that we urged France too much and unfairly. You must not,
dear Uncle, think that it is from want of interest that I, in general,
abstain from touching upon these matters in my letters to you; but I
am fearful, if I were to do so, to change our present delightful
and familiar correspondence into a formal and stiff discussion upon
political matters which would not be agreeable to either of us, and
which I should deeply regret. These are my reasons, and I trust you
will understand them, and be convinced of my unalterable and _very_
great affection for you, my dearest Uncle, and of the great interest
I take in all that concerns your welfare and happiness and the
prosperity of your country....

Pray give my affectionate love to Aunt Louise and the children, and
believe me, always, your most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: LORD DURHAM'S RESIGNATION]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_8th December 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
just received your Majesty's letters. Lord Durham arrived yesterday
evening, and Lord Melbourne has just seen Mr. Stanley, who has seen
him. He represents him as calm, but much hurt and vexed at the last
despatch which expresses your Majesty's disapprobation of his conduct
in issuing the proclamation.[42] Lord Durham said that he should
immediately write an answer to it, in which he should state that he
would communicate to the Government all the information which he had
collected upon the state of the Canadas. That he should not ask an
audience of your Majesty. This is his present decision. He may alter
it; if he should, and through any channel request an audience, Lord
Melbourne is now clearly of opinion that your Majesty should merely
say that an answer will be sent and the propriety of granting an
audience may then be fully considered by your Majesty's confidential
servants. Mr Stanley represents Lord Durham as not speaking with much
violence or asperity, but seeming to feel much the censure conveyed in
the last despatch.

Your Majesty will receive from the Colonial Office a _précis_ of
Sir John Colborne's despatches. Nothing can be more honourable. The
American force which made an incursion into Upper Canada have all been
taken prisoners....

Lord Melbourne thinks that as long as Lord Durham is here and some
communication has been received from him, he had better remain
to-night in London. He will return to Windsor to-morrow....

    [Footnote 42: Lord Durham stated at Devonport: "I shall, when
    Parliament meets, be prepared to make a representation
    of facts wholly unknown here, and disclosures which the
    Parliament and people have no conception of."]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_8th December 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
acquaint your Majesty that Lord Glenelg has this evening received
a letter from Lord Durham, tendering formally his resignation, and
stating that his general report upon the affairs of Canada must be
delayed until the gentlemen connected with his Mission return from
that country, which they were to leave on or about the 20th of
last month, and therefore may be shortly expected here. It will
be necessary to ask Lord Durham whether he has no intelligence of
immediate importance to give.




[Pageheading: AN ENGLISH CHURCH FOR MALTA]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

PALACE, VALETTA,[43] _13th December 1838._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--The English mail going to-day gives me another
opportunity to address you, and to name a subject to you which I think
deserves your consideration, and about which I feel most anxious. It
is the want of a _Protestant church_ in this place which I mean.
There are so many English residents here, it is the seat of an English
Government, and there is _not one_ church belonging to the Church of
England.... The consequence of this want of church accommodation has
been that the Dissenters have established themselves in considerable
numbers, and one cannot blame persons for attending their meetings
when they have no church of their own.

I address myself to you, as the head of the Church of England, and
entreat you to consider well this important subject, and to talk it
over with your Ministers and the Archbishop, in order to devise the
best means of remedying a want so discreditable to our country. Should
there be no funds at your disposal to effect this object, most happy
shall I feel to contribute to any subscription which may be set on
foot, and I believe that a considerable sum may be raised amongst the
Protestants of this island, where all parties are most anxious to
see a proper place of divine worship erected; without assistance from
England, however, it cannot be effected. I therefore most humbly and
confidently submit this subject to you, dearest Victoria, who will
bestow upon your Protestant subjects of this island an everlasting
benefit by granting them what they want most.[44]...

I hope this will find you quite well and happy, and that I shall soon
again have the pleasure of hearing from you. Give my affectionate love
to your dear Mother, and all my dear sisters, and believe me ever, my
dearest Niece, your most devoted and faithfully attached Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 43: The Queen-Dowager was at this time cruising in
    the Mediterranean, and made some stay at Malta.]

    [Footnote 44: Queen Adelaide herself erected the church at a
    cost of £10,000.]




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE'S ANXIETIES]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_21st December 1838._

... Lord Melbourne saw Mr. Stephenson this morning and learns from him
that the Duke of Sussex[45] is in the highest degree discontented at
being informed decisively that there is no intention of sending him
to Ireland. He is very loud against the Government, and is also very
angry with Mr Stephenson, and the latter expects that he shall receive
his dismissal.... Mr Stephenson assures Lord Melbourne that he has
mentioned this matter to no one but Lord Melbourne and Lady Mary,
and it is of importance that it should be kept secret. Lord Melbourne
thinks it his duty to apprise your Majesty of the feelings of the
Duke, and of the possible origin of them.

Lord and Lady Holland return to London to-day and Lord Melbourne is
going to dine with them.

    [Footnote 45: The Duke of Sussex was anxious to be appointed
    Viceroy of Ireland. Mr Stephenson was his Private Secretary.
    See _ante_, p. 129. (Ch. VII, 'Ireland and O'Connell)]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_22nd December 1838._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and cannot
express how deeply concerned he is to find himself restrained from
obeying your Majesty's commands, and repairing without delay to
Brighton. Both his duty and his inclination would prompt him to do
this without a moment's delay, if he did not find it incumbent upon
him to represent to your Majesty the very important circumstances
which require his presence for two or three days longer in London.
The session of Parliament approaches; the questions which are to be
considered and prepared are of the most appalling magnitude, and of
the greatest difficulty. Many of your Majesty's servants, who fill
the most important offices, are compelled by domestic calamity to
be absent, and it is absolutely necessary that there should be some
general superintendence of the measures to be proposed, and some
consideration of the arrangements to be made. Lord Melbourne assures
your Majesty that he would not delay in London if he did not feel it
to be absolutely necessary for your Majesty's service....




[Pageheading: BRIGHTON]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _28th December 1838._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I have to thank you for two extremely kind and
dear letters, which made me very happy, and your kind heart would
be pleased to know _how happy_. Sir H. Seymour[46] gave me a very
favourable account of your dearest Majesty, and was deeply gratified
by your gracious reception.

I am glad to find that you like Brighton better than last year. I
think Brighton very agreeable at this time of the year, till the east
winds set in. It also gives the possibility of seeing people without
having them on one's hands the whole day, as is the case in the
country. The Pavilion, besides, is comfortable; that cannot be denied.
Before my marriage it was there that I met the Regent. Charlotte
afterwards came with old Queen Charlotte. How distant all this
already, but still how present to one's memory.

The portrait of your Aunt and Leopold is nicely done. Don Leopoldo is
like, and has at times even a more intelligent look; he would amuse
you--he is very original and very sly. I often call him the little
tyrant, because nobody knows so well _de faire aller le monde_.... My
most beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 46: Sir Hamilton Seymour, Minister at Brussels.]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER VIII


THE chief political event of the year (1839) at home arose out of the
troubles in Jamaica. In addition to the apprenticeship question,
the state of the prisons, much overcrowded owing to the planters'
severity, had excited attention, and an Imperial Act was passed for
their regulation. To this action the Colonial Assembly showed marked
hostility, and, after the dissolution by Sir Lionel Smith, the
Governor, the new House was no more placable. Accordingly, the home
Government brought in a Bill, in April, to suspend temporarily the
Jamaica Constitution, but on a division had a majority of five only
in a house of five hundred and eighty-three. The Ministers therefore
resigned, and Sir Robert Peel was sent for; a difficulty as to
the Ladies of the Household, commonly called the Bedchamber Plot,
compelled him to resign the task, and the Whigs, much injured in
reputation, resumed office. Some changes took place, Macaulay joining
the Ministry, and Lord Normanby, who had succeeded Lord Glenelg at the
Colonial Office, exchanging places with Lord John Russell, the Home
Secretary. The trial of strength over the Speakership ended in a
victory for the Ministerial candidate, Mr Shaw Lefevre, by a majority
of eighteen in a house of six hundred and sixteen.

Penny Postage was introduced by an Act of this session.

The Princes Ernest and Albert of Saxe-Coburg arrived on a visit to the
Queen in October, and on the 14th the Queen's engagement to the latter
was announced by herself to Lord Melbourne. A few weeks later the
Queen announced her betrothal at a meeting of the Privy Council.

During the year risings in favour of the "people's charter" took place
in various parts of the country, especially Birmingham and Newport,
the six points demanded being the ballot, universal suffrage,
annual Parliaments, payment of members, the abolition of a property
qualification for members, and equal electoral districts. At
Newport one Frost, a linen-draper whom Lord John Russell had made a
magistrate, headed a riot. He was tried with his confederates by a
special commission at Monmouth, and, with two others, sentenced to
death; a sentence afterwards commuted.

In the East, war broke out between the Sultan Mahmoud and the Pasha of
Egypt, Mehemet Ali, who had originally helped Turkey against Greece,
but had since revolted and driven the Turks from Syria. On that
occasion (1833) Turkey had been saved by Russian intervention, a
defensive alliance, known as the treaty of Unkiar Skelessi, made
between Russia and Turkey, and Mehemet granted Syria as well as Egypt.
On the revival of hostilities, Ibrahim, son of Mehemet, defeated the
Turkish army on June 24; a week later the Sultan Mahmoud died, and
the Turkish admiral treacherously delivered over the Turkish fleet
to Mehemet at Alexandria. Once more the four Powers (Great Britain,
Austria, Prussia, and Russia) interfered to save the Sultan. The
Czar accepted the principle of a joint mediation, the advance of the
Egyptians was stopped, and the Sultan was informed that no terms of
peace would be accepted which had not received the approval of the
Powers. The terms were settled at a congress held in London. Mehemet
refused to accept the terms, and was encouraged by France to persevere
in his refusal.

The dispute between Belgium and Holland as to the Luxemburg territory
was settled by a treaty in the course of the year. Lord Durham
presented his report on Canada, a document drafted by Charles Buller
but inspired by Lord Durham himself; though legislation did not take
place this year, this document laid the foundation of the federal
union of the Canadas, and of the Constitution of other autonomous
colonies, but for the present the ex-Commissioner met with much
criticism of his actions.

Our troops were engaged during the year against Dost Mahommed, the
Ameer of Afghanistan, a usurper who many years earlier had driven
Shah Sooja into exile. Lord Auckland, the Viceroy of India, had sent
Captain (afterwards Sir Alexander) Burnes on a Mission to Cabul,
and the Ameer had received him hospitably at first, but subsequently
dismissed him from his Court. Lord Auckland thereupon resolved to
restore Shah Sooja, and in the autumn of 1838 issued a manifesto
dethroning Dost Mahommed. Operations were accordingly directed against
him under Sir John (afterwards Lord) Keane, who, on August 6, 1839,
entered Cabul and placed Shah Sooja on the throne. However open to
criticism, the news of this result was enthusiastically received in
England, and Lord Auckland was promoted to an Earldom.

In China a dispute of long standing became acute. With the renewal of
the East India Company's charter, in 1834, the Chinese ports had been
thrown open, and the opium trade became a source of great profit
to private traders. In spite of the prohibition which the Chinese
Government laid on importation of opium, the traffic was actively
carried on, and, as a result of the strained relations which ensued,
Captain Elliot, the British Chief Superintendent, requested that
warships should proceed to China for the protection of British life
and property.




CHAPTER VIII

1839


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

PAVILION [BRIGHTON], _1st January 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--... I don't like your _croaking_ so about damp
climates; if a niece may venture to say such a thing, I might almost
say it is ungrateful to your faithful and attached Belgians.

The Queen-Dowager's letters do tantalize one a good deal, I must
own.[1] You will see that old Lord Clarendon[2] is dead, which makes
our friend Villiers Earl of Clarendon, but I am afraid not with a
large income.

Lord Palmerston has been unwell and obliged to go to Broadlands, where
he still is. He had gone through so much grief and labour, that it was
absolutely necessary for him to recruit his strength. The Normanbys
spent two nights here.[3] Lord Melbourne is the only person staying in
the house besides several of my Court and my suite, and, I am sorry to
say, is not very well; he has also had, I fear, too much business to
do.

Lady Breadalbane[4] is my new Lady of the Bedchamber, and a very nice
person. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Forgive this short scrawl.

    [Footnote 1: Queen Adelaide had described the orange-trees and
    tropical fruits in the gardens of the Palace of St Antonio,
    Valetta.]

    [Footnote 2: John Charles, third Earl, Chief Justice-in-eyre,
    North of Trent. His successor, who had been Minister to Spain
    since 1833, was afterwards the celebrated Foreign Secretary.]

    [Footnote 3: Lord Normanby, at this time Lord-Lieutenant of
    Ireland, became successively during the year, Colonial and
    Home Secretary. Lady Normanby, who had been a Lady-in-Waiting
    since the accession, was a daughter of the first Lord
    Ravensworth.]

    [Footnote 4: Eliza, daughter of George Baillie of Jerviswood.
    Her brother afterwards became tenth Earl of Haddington.]





[Pageheading: MURDER OF LORD NORBURY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_6th January 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
returns his best and warmest thanks for the very kind and gracious
communication which he had the honour and pleasure of receiving from
your Majesty yesterday evening. Your Majesty will have seen in the
newspapers that Lord Norbury was shot at in his own grounds and
dangerously wounded.[5] Lord Melbourne learns to-day by a letter
from Lord Morpeth that Lord Norbury is since dead. This is a shocking
event, and will, of course, create a strong sensation, much stronger
than the death in the same manner of several persons of inferior
degree. It is almost the first time that an attempt of this kind has
been directed against an individual of that rank or station....

Lord Melbourne has seen Sir Henry Halford,[6] who says that his pulse
is low and his system languid. He has prescribed some draughts, which
Lord Melbourne trusts will be of service, but he feels much depressed
to-day. He dined yesterday at Lady Holland's, where he met Mr
Ellice,[7] civil and friendly enough in appearance, but Lord Melbourne
fears hostile at heart, and a determined partisan of Lord Durham. Lord
Durham has not yet made to Lord Glenelg the promised communication of
his report and plan, but it is said that he will do so soon....

    [Footnote 5: At Kilbeggan Abbey, County Meath. The murderer
    escaped.]

    [Footnote 6: The celebrated physician: he attended George IV.
    and William IV., as well as Queen Victoria.]

    [Footnote 7: Son-in-law of Lord Grey, as was also Lord
    Durham.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _11th January 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--The dreadful moment has arrived, and dear Marie[8] is
no more to bless her loving relations with her presence on this earth
of grief and troubles! It is a heavy dispensation, and one that it is
difficult to comprehend, but we must submit.

I thought it best to write to my poor dear Aunt, for whom this will
be a sad blow; but I abstained from doing so to the dear Queen of the
French just as yet. I have no letters, and only learnt the melancholy
event by the papers. Poor wretched Alexander! What a loss, what a
change for him, poor fellow!

_You_ will, I am sure, regret that sweet amiable creature, as poor
Marie was, very much, having known her so well, and her attachment to
you was great.

I will not prolong this letter, but merely repeat _how_ much I feel
for you all, and beg you to believe me, your most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 8: Princess Marie of Orleans, born 1813, sister to
    the Queen of the Belgians, had married Prince Alexander of
    Würtemberg, in 1837.]




[Pageheading: HOLLAND AND BELGIUM]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _18th January 1839._

... Your Aunt as well as myself are very anxious to be of use to poor
Alexander. The dispositions of the whole family are extremely
kind towards him, but he is shy and a little helpless; his present
melancholy situation is of course calculated to increase this.
His position puts me in mind of mine in 1817.... He, besides, is
surrounded by people who are kind to him. Of George IV., then Regent,
it was observed that for years he had not been in such good
spirits than by the loss of his daughter. She was more popular than
himself--that was, since her mariage, her only crime....

I feel very grateful for Lord Melbourne's kindness on the subject of
our sad loss. He is so feeling and kindhearted that he, much more than
most men who have lived so much in the _grand monde_, has preserved a
certain warmth and freshness of feeling....

Your cousins kiss your hands, and I remain, my dearest Victoria, your
devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

STANHOPE STREET, _27th January 1839._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
returns to your Majesty the accompanying papers which he received
from Viscount Melbourne. Your Majesty will have seen by Sir Edward
Disbrowe's[9] despatches that the concentration of Dutch troops
mentioned in these reports was purely defensive, and was the
consequence of the military demonstrations previously made by the
Belgians; and it appears, moreover, that the Dutch force is inferior
in number to the Belgian force opposite to it; and that affords an
additional security against the chance of an invasion of Belgium by
the Dutch. It is, however, undeniable that when two armies are drawn
up in face of each other, separated by a small distance, and animated
by mutual hatred, the chances of collision become great and imminent.
But it is to be hoped in the present case that the communication made
by the Conference to the two parties on Thursday last may avert danger
of hostilities between the Dutch and Belgians.[10]

    [Footnote 9: Minister at the Hague.]

    [Footnote 10: _See_ next letter.]




[Pageheading: BELGIUM AND ENGLAND]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _7th February 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I am much grieved to learn that poor Philippe[11] has
given you such anxiety. My poor Aunt! it really is too much upon her
to have these cares added to her recent severe affliction. I hope to
God that I shall get news of Philippe's complete recovery to-morrow.

I regret to hear that your Government gives you so much trouble,
but trust that you will exert all your influence, as you have so
frequently done, to persuade your Ministers to be reasonable, and not
to resist the favourable offers made to the Government. _Everybody_
here is exceedingly anxious for the conclusion of these long pending
affairs, and hope that the answer from Belgium will soon arrive.[12]
You will forgive me, dear Uncle, if I express to you my earnest hope
that these expectations may not be disappointed, for I feel that
since the Dutch have so instantly accepted the proposition of the
Conference, Belgium would suffer in the eyes of this country were she
to delay, and, what I am still more fearful of, my beloved Uncle, you
might be blamed, and suffer for what your Government may do. You will,
I know, forgive this freedom, which is prompted by my great anxiety
for your _welfare_ and _happiness_ (which I know you are well aware
of), and for the preservation of the inestimable blessings of peace.
No one feels more for you than I do at this difficult moment, nor than
I have done throughout these trying and embarrassing affairs. That all
may be peaceably and amicably settled is my earnest prayer.

Everything went off well yesterday,[13] and we are again launched into
a political campaign, which it is impossible not to contemplate with a
certain degree of anxiety.

Adieu! my dear Uncle. Give my love to my dear Aunt, and believe me,
always, your most devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 11: See _ante_, p. 65. (12th April, 1837)]

    [Footnote 12: The twenty-four Articles, to which Belgium
    had acceded in 1831, had then been rejected by Holland. Now,
    however, Holland wished to adopt them. The Belgian Government
    vainly proposed different schemes, but at last the Bill for
    ratifying the proposal of the Powers (made 23rd January 1839,
    and accepted by Holland on 11th February) passed the Belgian
    Chambers.]

    [Footnote 13: The Queen opened Parliament in person on 6th
    February.]




[Pageheading: CABINET DISSENSION]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_10th February 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thinks
it right and necessary to acquaint your Majesty that the Cabinet
yesterday was very stormy and unpleasant. Lord John Russell brought on
the question of the Civil Government of the Army, in a temperate and
judicious manner, but Lord Howick made a most violent speech, strongly
condemning the whole of the present system and arraigning the conduct
of the Treasury and other Departments, saying that he should not throw
up his office because no measure was brought forward, but that, when
questioned upon the subject by Mr Hume in the House of Commons, as it
was certain that he would be, he should say that Government would do
nothing upon the subject, until he (Mr Hume) compelled them, and that
he should express his entire disapprobation of the present system,
and his reasons in detail for that disapprobation. Your Majesty will
perceive that nothing could be more violent than this course. It was
borne with great patience by the rest of the Cabinet, although Mr.
Rice,[14] against whom the greater part of Lord Howick's speech was
directed, felt himself most deeply hurt, and so expressed himself in
private afterwards to Lord Melbourne. Upon the whole, Lord Melbourne
cannot but consider that affairs are in a most precarious state, and
that whilst there is so much discontent fermenting within the Cabinet
itself, there must be great doubt of Lord Melbourne's being much
longer able to hold the Administration together.

    [Footnote 14: The Chancellor of the Exchequer.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_10th February 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is very
sorry that his communication has occasioned your Majesty so much alarm
and uneasiness. Lord Melbourne hopes that there is nothing imminent
and immediate, but this sort of outbreak and contention may so soon
become serious, that Lord Melbourne thought it his duty to take an
early opportunity of informing your Majesty of what had taken place.
Lord Melbourne would wait upon your Majesty without delay, but trusts
that this letter will be sufficient to dispel any disquietude which
his former communication may have excited.




[Pageheading: THE DUKE OF LUCCA]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _20th February 1839._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that Mr Charles Villiers[15] moved yesterday,
after a very able speech, that the petitioners against the Corn Laws
should be heard at the Bar of the House.

Sir Robert Peel opposed the Motion on the ground that he meant to
resist any change in the Corn Laws. He made a very skilful use of the
returns of cotton, etc., exported.

    [Footnote 15: M.P. for Wolverhampton 1835-1898, becoming
    "Father of the House."]




_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

STANHOPE STREET, _5th March 1839._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty,
and requests to be honoured with your Majesty's commands upon the
accompanying letter from Count Pollon.[16] Viscount Palmerston at the
same time begs to state that he has reason to believe, from what Count
Pollon said to him in conversation two days ago, that the Duke of
Lucca[17] has a notion that Sovereign Princes who have had the honour
of dining with your Majesty, have been invited by note and not by
card. If that should be so, and if your Majesty should invite the
Duke of Lucca to dine at the Palace before his departure, perhaps the
invitation might be made by note, instead of by card, as it was when
the Duke last dined at the Palace. Your Majesty may think this a small
matter, but the Duke is a small Sovereign.

    [Footnote 16: For many years Sardinian Minister in England.]

    [Footnote 17: Lucca was an independent Italian State.]




[Pageheading: PORTUGAL]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_9th March 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and feels
very deeply the very kind and gracious concern which your Majesty
expresses for his health, as well as your Majesty's solicitude and
interest upon all occasions. Lord Melbourne will take your Majesty's
advice, but his experience teaches him that illness is not so easily
put off, and that it will have its course in spite of precaution....

Lord Melbourne thinks, upon the whole, that your Majesty had perhaps
better write by messenger a few lines of kindness and recollection.
It can be no descent on your Majesty's part to do so, and as we may be
obliged to take very strong measures with respect to Portugal, it
is as well that there should be no appearance of any deficiency of
affection or attention. Lord Melbourne [thinks] that, for the reason
given by your Majesty, your Majesty may perhaps as well not go to the
play this evening, but is very sorry to hear that your Majesty is low
and out of spirits.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _14th March 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--Many thanks for two letters, one which I received last
Sunday, and the other enclosing a letter from Stockmar this morning. I
am glad you agree with me about Victoire.[18] Since I wrote to you,
I got these two letters from the Portuguese children--as I
disrespectfully but very deservedly call them--which I send you, in
order that you may see how they wish Victoire to come to them, which
I fear and think is totally impracticable, for it would never do for
Victoire to go so far without her mother. Nevertheless, I thought it
but right by them to send you these letters, and I have written to
them giving them little hope.

The French Ministry are gone, and I am sure the poor King will be much
vexed by it. They talk of Broglie as Minister for Foreign Affairs,[19]
but I am afraid Thiers is inevitable. We are rather in fear of Thiers
here, but it is a pity that Louis Philippe should show so much dislike
to a man he must take, for it will have the effect of a defeat.

I have no time to add more, but to beg you to believe me, always, your
most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 18: Daughter of Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, and
    married in April 1840 to the Duc de Nemours.]

    [Footnote 19: After a provisional Cabinet, in which the Duc de
    Montebello was Foreign Minister, the King appointed a Ministry
    with Soult as Premier and Foreign Minister.]




[Pageheading: DIFFICULTIES OF THE MINISTRY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_22nd March 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
acquaint your Majesty that the Cabinet have decided--

1. That it is impossible to acquiesce in the vote of last night in the
House of Lords.[20]

2. That it would not be justifiable to resign in the face of the
declaration which I made in the year 1836, in the House of Lords, that
I would maintain my post as long as I possessed the confidence of the
Crown and of the House of Commons, particularly as there is no reason
to suppose that we have lost the confidence of the House.

3. That the course to be pursued is to give notice in the House
of Commons to-night, that the sense of that House will be taken
immediately after the Easter Holidays, upon a vote of approbation of
the principles of Lord Normanby's government of Ireland.

If we lose that question, or carry it by a small majority, we must
resign. If we carry it, we may go on.

This is a plain statement of the case, and this course will at least
give your Majesty time to consider what is to be done.

    [Footnote 20: By 63 to 58 Lord Roden carried a motion for a
    Select Committee to enquire into the state of Ireland; the
    Ministry replied by obtaining a vote of the House of Commons
    in their favour by 318 to 296.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL,[21] _1st April 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has just
received your Majesty's letters, for which he returns many and warm
thanks. Nothing could be more prosperous than his journey down,
although it rained hard the greater part of the way. Lord Melbourne
slept well, and has walked out this morning, although it was still
showery. Nothing is so fatiguing as the first exposure to the air of
the country, and Lord Melbourne feels the influence of it.

Lord Melbourne returns the letters of the King of the Belgians. He
accounts very naturally for the conduct of the poor Duchess,[22] but
she should have recollected the extreme disadvantage and discredit
which attaches to a change of religion. _Un gentilhomme ne change
jamais la religion_, was the saying of Napoleon, and is very just. It
is difficult to understand the movements and motives of parties in a
foreign country, and therefore Lord Melbourne does not feel able to
pronounce any opinion upon the transactions in France. Lord Melbourne
had seen G----'s letters, a pert jackanapes, who always takes the
worst view of every subject, and does as much mischief as he can....

Lord Melbourne is just starting for Panshanger.[23] The evening is
better than the morning was, but cold.

    [Footnote 21: Lord Melbourne's house on the Lea, about three
    miles north of Hatfield. Its construction was begun by Sir
    Matthew Lamb, and completed by his son, Sir Peniston, the
    first Lord Melbourne.]

    [Footnote 22: Princess Alexander of Würtemberg. On her
    death-bed, she had expressed a wish to her husband that he
    should join the Roman Catholic Church.]

    [Footnote 23: Panshanger, not far distant from Brocket, the
    house of Lord Melbourne's brother-in-law, Lord Cowper, and
    celebrated for its pictures, was bought by Lord Chancellor
    Cowper, _temp._ Queen Anne.]




[Pageheading: ENGLAND AND BELGIUM]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _9th April 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--... I regret to learn you are still not easy about
your own affairs, but trust all will now be speedily adjusted. You
always allow me, dear Uncle, to speak frankly to you; you will,
therefore, I hope, not be displeased if I venture to make a few
observations on one or two parts of your letter.

You say that the anger of the Belgians is principally directed against
England.[24] Now, I must say you are very unjust towards us, and (if
I could) I might be even a little angry with you, dear Uncle. We only
_pressed_ Belgium for her _own_ good, and _not_ for ours. It may seem
hard at first, but the time will come when you will see that we were
right in urging you not to delay any longer the signature of the
treaty.

I think that you will see in this frank expression of my sentiments no
wish to annoy or hurt you, but only an anxious desire to prove to you
that England is Belgium's sincere friend, and that my Government
are ever desirous of doing what is in their power for the welfare,
security, and prosperity of yourself and your kingdom.

I regret much the state of affairs in France,[25] which cannot but
make us all somewhat anxious; you will, I hope tell me what news you
hear from Paris.

Pray, dearest Uncle, receive my best, my very warmest, wishes for many
happy returns of dear Leopold's birthday, and also, though somewhat
late, for Philippe's birthday.

Give my love to my dear Aunt, and believe me, always, your most
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 24: He had written on 5th April:--"The feeling is
    strongest against England, in which the people expected to
    see a support, and only found a strong determination to decide
    _everything against them_ and at _their expense_. If there was
    a great explosion in France, it would not be astonishing to
    see the people here join it; it would rather be astonishing to
    see it otherwise, after the kind treatment they received from
    the Powers."]

    [Footnote 25: The King was for a time without any Ministry,
    and the meeting of the Chambers had to be postponed.]




[Pageheading: PRINCE ALBERT IN ITALY]


_Baron Stockmar to Queen Victoria._

NAPLES, _16th April 1839._

MADAM,--As it is some time that I had the honour to address your
Majesty, I hope that a further account of our crusades will meet with
a favourable reception.

It is now somewhat better than a month that we left Florence, I may
say with regret, for we were there very comfortably in every respect.
On our route to Rome we enjoyed the beautiful sight of the cataract at
Terni, the place where Queen Caroline sojourned for some time. We were
particularly fortunate that day, as the brightest sunshine heightened
its picturesque effects beyond description. We found old Rome very
full, and to see it and its ecclesiastic governors to advantage, the
Holy Week is certainly the properest time. From morning to noon the
Prince was at seeing sights, and he made so good a use of his time,
that I don't think that something really remarkable was left unseen.
Upon this very principle, we paid our respects to the Holy Father,[26]
of which interview the Prince made so admirable a sketch, so very
worthy of H.B.,[27] that I am very much tempted to send it for the
inspection of your Majesty. We assisted at the Church ceremonies of
the Holy Week from the beginning to the end. The music of the Sistine
Chapel, which is only vocal, may be well considered as unique, and has
not failed to make a lasting impression upon a mind so musical as the
Prince's....

I never think of your Majesty--and I take the liberty of thinking
very frequently of you--without praying for health, serenity of mind,
comfort and success for you, and I can well say that I am from my
heart, your Majesty's sincerely attached and devoted Servant,

STOCKMAR.

    [Footnote 26: Gregory XVI.]

    [Footnote 27: Initials adopted by Mr Doyle, father of Richard
    Doyle, in his _Reform Caricatures_.]




[Pageheading: BELGIUM]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

_19th April 1839._

... I am glad I extracted some spark of politics from your dear
Majesty, very _kindly_ and _nicely_ expressed. I know that your
generous little heart would not have wished at any time but what was
good for a country in which you were _much beloved_. But the fact is,
that certainly your Government have taken the lead in maintaining a
condition which time had rendered difficult to comply with. Physicians
will tell you that often an operation, which might have been performed
at one time, could not, without great danger for the patient, be
undertaken some years later. We have not been listened to, and
arrangements _are forced_ on us, in themselves full of seeds of
danger, when by consulting the _real interests_ of Holland and
Belgium, both countries might have been placed on a footing of
_sincere peace_ and good neighbourhood. This country feels now humbled
and _désenchanté_ with its _soi-disant_ political independence as it
pleased the Conference to settle it. They will take a dislike to a
political state which _wounds their vanity_, and will, in consequence
of this, _not wish it to continue_. Two things will happen, therefore,
on the very first opportunity, either that this country will
be involved in war to better a position which it thinks _too
humiliating_, or that it will voluntarily throw up a nominal
independence in which it is now hemmed in between France and Holland,
which begins on the North Sea, and ends, of all the things in this
world, on _the Moselle_!

I think old Pirson, who said in the Chamber that if the treaty was
carried into execution I was likely to be the first and last King
of the country, was not wrong. Whenever this will happen, it will be
_very awkward_ for England, and _deservedly so_. To see, after eight
years of hard work, blooming and thriving political plantations cut
and maimed, and that by those who have a real interest to protect
them, is very melancholy. I do not say these things with the most
distant idea of bringing about any change, but only because in the
high and very responsible position in which Providence has placed
you, it is good to tell you the truth, as you ought to have weight
and influence on the affairs of Europe; and England, not being in
the possibility of making territorial acquisition, has a real and
permanent interest in the proper maintenance of a balance of political
power in Europe. Now I will leave you to enjoy the beginning of
Spring, which a mild rain seems to push on prodigiously. Believe me
ever, my dear Victoria, your very attached Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: JAMAICA]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_26th April 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
inform your Majesty that the result of the Cabinet has been a decision
to stand by the Bill as we have introduced it, and not to accede to
Sir Robert Peel's proposal. The Bill is for suspending the functions
of the Legislative Assembly of Jamaica, and governing that island for
five years by a Governor and Council.[28] If Sir Robert Peel should
persist in his proposal, and a majority of the House of Commons should
concur with him, it will be such a mark of want of confidence as it
will be impossible for your Majesty's Government to submit to.

    [Footnote 28: _See_ Introductory Note, _ante_, p. 141. ( to Ch. VIII)]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _30th April 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I have to thank you for your last letter, which
I received on Sunday. Though you seem not to dislike my political
sparks, I think it is better not to increase them, as they might
finally take fire, particularly as I see with regret that upon this
one subject we cannot agree. I shall therefore limit myself to my
expressions of very sincere wishes for the welfare and prosperity of
Belgium.

The Grand Duke,[29] after a long delay, is at length to arrive on
Friday night; I shall put myself out of my way in order to be very
civil to such a great personage. I am already thinking how I shall
lodge all my relations; you must prepare Uncle Ferdinand for its not
being _very ample_, but this Palace, though large, is not calculated
to hold many visitors....

Believe me, always, your very affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 29: The Hereditary Grand Duke of Russia, afterwards
    the Emperor Alexander II.]




[Pageheading: MINISTERIAL CRISIS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_7th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has to
acquaint your Majesty that the division upon the Jamaica Bill, which
took place about two this morning, was two hundred and ninety-nine
against the measure, and three hundred and four in favour of it.[30]
Lord Melbourne has not heard from Lord John Russell since this event,
but a Cabinet will of course be summoned early this morning, and Lord
Melbourne cannot conceal from your Majesty that in his opinion the
determination of the Cabinet must be that the relative numbers upon
this vote, joined to the consideration of no less than nine members
of those who have hitherto invariably supported the Government having
gone against it now, leave your Majesty's confidential servants no
alternative but to resign their offices into your Majesty's hands.
They cannot give up the Bill either with honour or satisfaction to
their own consciences, and in the face of such an opposition they
cannot persevere in it with any hope of success. Lord Melbourne
is certain that your Majesty will not deem him too presuming if
he expresses his fear that this decision will be both painful and
embarrassing to your Majesty, but your Majesty will meet this crisis
with that firmness which belongs to your character, and with that
rectitude and sincerity which will carry your Majesty through all
difficulties. It will also be greatly painful to Lord Melbourne to
quit the service of a Mistress who has treated him with such unvarying
kindness and unlimited confidence; but in whatever station he may be
placed, he will always feel the deepest anxiety for your Majesty's
interests and happiness, and will do the utmost in his power to
promote and secure them.

    [Footnote 30: The numbers are apparently incorrectly stated.
    The division was 294 to 289.]




[Pageheading: RESIGNATION IMMINENT]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_7th May 1839._

The present circumstances have been for some time so probable, or
rather so certain, that Lord Melbourne has naturally been led to weigh
and consider maturely the advice which, if called upon, he should
tender to your Majesty when they did arrive. That advice is, at once
to send for the Duke of Wellington. Your Majesty appears to Lord
Melbourne to have no other alternative. The Radicals have neither
ability, honesty, nor numbers. They have no leaders of any character.
Lord Durham was raised, one hardly knows how, into something of a
factitious importance by his own extreme opinions, by the panegyrics
of those who thought he would serve them as an instrument, and by the
management of the Press, but any little public reputation which he
might once have acquired has been entirely dissipated and destroyed by
the continued folly of his conduct in his Canadian Government. There
is no party in the State to which your Majesty can now resort, except
that great party which calls itself Conservative, and of that party,
his rank, station, reputation, and experience point out the Duke of
Wellington as the person to whom your Majesty should apply.

Lord Melbourne therefore advises that your Majesty should send for the
Duke of Wellington, and should acquaint him, provided your Majesty so
feels, that you were entirely satisfied with your late Government, and
that you part from them with reluctance; but that as he and the party
of which he is the head have been the means of removing them from
office, you naturally look to him to advise you as to the means of
supplying their places and carrying on the business of the country.

If the Duke should be unwilling to form the Government himself, and
should desire to devolve the task upon Sir Robert Peel, Lord Melbourne
would advise your Majesty to accede to that suggestion; but Lord
Melbourne would counsel your Majesty to be very unwilling to suffer
the Government to be formed by Sir Robert Peel, without the active
assistance in office of the Duke of Wellington.

With respect both to measures and appointments, your Majesty should
place the fullest confidence in those to whom you entrust the
management of affairs, exercising at the same time, and fully
expressing, your own judgment upon both.

Your Majesty will do well to be from the beginning very vigilant that
all measures and all appointments are stated to your Majesty in the
first instance, and your Majesty's pleasure taken thereon previously
to any instruments being drawn out for carrying them into effect, and
submitted to your Majesty's signature. It is the more necessary to be
watchful and active in this respect, as the extreme confidence which
your Majesty has reposed in me may have led to some omission at times
of these most necessary preliminaries.

The patronage of the Lord Chamberlain's Department is of the greatest
importance, and may be made to conduce at once to the beneficial
influence of the Crown, and to the elevation and encouragement of the
professions of the Church and of Medicine. This patronage, by being
left to the uncontrolled exercise of successive Lord Chamberlains, has
been administered not only wastefully but perniciously. The physicians
to the late King were many of them men of little eminence; the
chaplains are still a sorry set. Your Majesty should insist with the
new Ministers that this patronage should be disposed of, not by the
Lord Chamberlain, but, as it has hitherto been during your Majesty's
reign, by your Majesty upon consultation with your Prime Minister.




[Pageheading: DISTRESS OF THE QUEEN]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _9th May 1839._

The Queen thinks Lord Melbourne may possibly wish to know how she
is this morning; the Queen is somewhat calmer; she was in a wretched
state till nine o'clock last night, when she tried to occupy herself
and try to think less gloomily of this dreadful change, and she
succeeded in calming herself till she went to bed at twelve, and she
slept well; but on waking this morning, all--all that had happened
in one short eventful day came most forcibly to her mind, and brought
back her grief; the Queen, however, feels better now; but she couldn't
touch a morsel of food last night, nor can she this morning. The Queen
trusts Lord Melbourne slept well, and is well this morning; and that
he will come precisely at eleven o'clock. The Queen has received no
answer from the Duke, which is very odd, for she knows he got her
letter. The Queen hopes Lord Melbourne received her letter last night.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_8th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is
much grieved that he did not answer your Majesty's letter yesterday
evening, as your Majesty desired, but he did not get it till late, and
he felt much tired and harassed by all that had passed during the day.
The situation is very painful, but it is necessary for your Majesty to
be prudent and firm. It is of all things necessary not to be suspected
of any unfair dealing. Whilst Lord Melbourne holds his office,
everything of course may be written to him as usual; but still the
resolutions for the formation of the new Government will now commence,
and it will never do, whilst they are going on, either for appearance
or in reality, that Lord Melbourne should dine with your Majesty, as
he did before this disturbance. It would create feeling, possibly lead
to remonstrance, and throw a doubt upon the fairness and integrity
of your Majesty's conduct. All this is very painful both to do and to
say, but it is unavoidable; it must be said, and it must be done. Lord
Melbourne will wait upon your Majesty at eleven.[31]

    [Footnote 31: Lord Melbourne had made the not unnatural
    mistake of recommending to the Queen, as members of her first
    Household, ladies who were nearly related to himself and his
    Whig colleagues. No doubt these were the ladies whom he knew
    best, and in whom he had entire confidence; but he ought to
    have had sufficient prescience to see that the Queen would
    probably form strong attachments to the ladies who first
    served her: and that if the appointments had not in the first
    instance a political complexion, yet that the Whig tendencies
    which these Ladies represented were likely to affect the
    Queen, in the direction of allying her closely with a
    particular party in the State.]




[Pageheading: THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON]

[Pageheading: SIR ROBERT PEEL]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

_8th May 1839._

The Queen told Lord Melbourne she would give him an account of what
passed, which she is _very_ anxious to do. She saw the Duke for about
twenty minutes; the Queen said she supposed he knew why she sent for
him, upon which the Duke said, No, he had no idea. The Queen then said
that she had had the greatest confidence in her late Ministry, and
had parted with them with the greatest reluctance; upon which the Duke
observed that he could assure me no one felt more pain in hearing the
announcement of their resignation than he did, and that he was deeply
grieved at it. The Queen then continued, that as his party had been
instrumental in removing them, that she must look to him to form a
new Government. The Duke answered that he had no power whatever in
the House of Commons, "that if he was to say black was white,[32] they
would say it was not," and that he advised me to send for Sir Robert
Peel, in whom I could place confidence, and who was a gentleman and a
man of honour and integrity. The Queen then said she hoped he would at
all events have a place in the new Cabinet. The Duke at first rather
refused, and said he was so deaf, and so old and unfit for any
discussion, that if he were to consult his own feelings he would
rather not do it, and remain quite aloof; but that as he was very
anxious to do anything that would tend to the Queen's comfort, and
would do everything and at all times that could be of use to the
Queen, and therefore if she and her Prime Minister urged his accepting
office, he would. The Queen said she had more confidence in him
than in any of the others of his party. The Queen then mentioned the
subject of the Household, and of those who were not in Parliament. The
Duke did not give any decisive answer about it, but advised the Queen
not to begin with conditions of this sort, and wait till the matter
was proposed. The Queen then said that she felt certain he would
understand the great friendship she had for Lord Melbourne, who had
been to her quite a parent, and the Duke said _no one felt and knew
that better than he did, and that no one could still be of greater
use to the Queen than Lord Melbourne_. The Duke spoke of his personal
friendship for Lord Melbourne, and that he hoped I knew that he had
often done all he could to help your (Lord Melbourne's) Government.
The Queen then mentioned her intention to prove her great _fairness_
to her new Government in telling them, that they might know there was
no unfair dealing, that I meant to see you often as a friend, as I
owed _so_ much to you. The Duke said he quite understood it, and knew
I would not exercise this to weaken the Government, and that he would
take my part about it, and felt for me. He was very kind, and said he
called it "a misfortune" that you had all left me.

The Queen wrote to Peel, who came after two, embarrassed and put out.
The Queen repeated what she had said to the Duke about her former
Government, and asked Sir Robert to form a new Ministry. He does not
seem sanguine; says entering the Government in a minority is very
difficult; he felt unequal to the task, and far from exulting in what
had happened, as he knew what pain it must give me; he quite approved
that the Duke should take office, and saw the importance of it; meant
to offer him the post of Secretary for Foreign Affairs, and if he
refused, Lord Aberdeen; Lord Lyndhurst, Chancellor; hoped to secure
Stanley and Graham; Goulburn to be the candidate for the Speaker's
Chair; he expects a severe conflict then, and if he should be beat
must either resign or dissolve Parliament. Before this the Queen said
she was against a dissolution, in which he quite agreed, but of course
wished no conditions should be made; he felt the task arduous, and
that he would require me to demonstrate (_a certain_ degree, if _any_
I can only feel) confidence in the Government, and that my Household
would be one of the marks of that. The Queen mentioned the same thing
about her Household, to which he at present would give no answer, and
said nothing should be done without my knowledge or approbation. He
repeated his surprise at the course you had all taken in resigning,
which he did not expect. The Queen talked of her great friendship for,
and gratitude to Lord Melbourne, and repeated what she had said to the
Duke, in which Peel agreed; but he is such a cold, odd man she can't
make out what he means. He said he couldn't expect me to have the
confidence in him I had in you (and which he never can have) as he has
not deserved it. My impression is, he is not _happy_ and sanguine. He
comes to me to-morrow at one to report progress in his formation of
the new Government. The Queen don't like his manner after--oh! how
different, how dreadfully different, to that frank, open, natural and
most kind, warm manner of Lord Melbourne.[33] The Duke I like by far
better to Peel. The Queen trusts Lord Melbourne will excuse this long
letter, but she was so very anxious he should know all. The Queen was
very much collected, and betrayed no agitation during these two
trying Audiences. But afterwards again _all_ gave way. She feels Lord
Melbourne will understand it, amongst enemies to those she most relied
on and esteemed, and people who seem to have no heart; but what is
worst of all is the being deprived of seeing Lord Melbourne as she
used to do.

    [Footnote 32: _Sic_: an obvious mistake for "black was
    black."]

    [Footnote 33: Lady de Grey had written to Peel on 7th
    May:--"The Queen has always expressed herself much impressed
    with Lord Melbourne's open manner, and his truth. The latter
    quality you possess, the former not.

    "Now, dear Peel, the first impression on so young a girl's
    mind is of immense consequence, accustomed as she has been
    to the open and affectionate manner of Lord Melbourne, who,
    _entre nous_, treats her as a father, and, with all his
    faults, feels for her as such."--_Sir Robert Peel_, Parker,
    vol. ii. p. 389.]




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE'S ADVICE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_9th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has read
with the greatest attention the very clear and distinct account which
your Majesty has written of that which passed at the Audiences which
your Majesty has given to the Duke of Wellington and Sir Robert Peel.
Nothing could have been more proper and judicious than your Majesty's
conduct, and they appear to have acted upon their part with propriety
and sincerity. Lord Melbourne has no doubt that both with respect
to him (Lord Melbourne) and to themselves and their own feelings and
position, they expressed what they really think. The Duke was right in
saying that in general, in affairs of this nature, it is best not to
begin with conditions; but this matter of the Household is so personal
to yourself, that it was best to give an intimation of your feelings
upon it in the first instance. Lord Melbourne has little doubt that if
they could have acted from themselves, they would have acceded to your
Majesty's wish at once; but your Majesty must recollect that they have
others to satisfy, and must not attribute entirely to them anything
that is harsh and unreasonable. Lord Melbourne advises your Majesty
to urge this question of the Household strongly as a matter due to
yourself and your own wishes; but if Sir Robert is unable to concede
it, it will not do to refuse and to put off the negotiation upon it.
Lord Melbourne would strongly advise your Majesty to do everything to
facilitate the formation of the Government. Everything is to be
done and to be endured rather than run the risk of getting into the
situation in which they are in France, of no party being able to form
a Government and conduct the affairs of the country.[34]

The Dissolution of Parliament is a matter of still more importance,
and if this should be again pressed upon your Majesty, Lord Melbourne
would advise your Majesty to reserve your opinion, not to give a
promise that you will dissolve, nor to say positively that you
will not. You may say that you do not think it right to fetter the
Prerogative of the Crown by previous engagements, that a dissolution
of Parliament is to be decided according to the circumstances at the
time, that you mean to give full confidence to the Government that
shall be formed, and to do everything in your power to support them,
and that you will consider whether Parliament shall be dissolved, when
you are advised to dissolve it, and have before you the reasons for
such a measure.

Lord Melbourne earnestly entreats your Majesty not to suffer yourself
to be affected by any faultiness of manner which you may observe.
Depend upon it, there is no personal hostility to Lord Melbourne nor
any bitter feelings against him. Sir Robert is the most cautious and
reserved of mankind. Nobody seems to Lord Melbourne to know him, but
he is not therefore deceitful or dishonest. Many a very false man has
a very open sincere manner, and _vice versâ_....

Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes that your Majesty is better this
morning.

    [Footnote 34: Alluding to the successive failures of Soult,
    Thiers, and Broglie.]




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _9th May 1839._

The Queen cannot sufficiently thank Lord Melbourne for his most kind
letter, and for his excellent advice, which is at once the greatest
comfort and of the greatest use to her; the Queen will follow it in
every respect, and nothing of importance shall be done without due
reflection; and she trusts Lord Melbourne will help her and be to her
what she told him he was, and begged him still ever to be--a father to
one who never wanted support more than she does now.

Lord Melbourne shall hear again after she sees Peel this morning....

The Queen has just now heard Lord Liverpool is not in town.

The Queen hopes Lord Melbourne is able to read her letters; if ever
there is anything he cannot read, he must send them back, and mark
what he can't read.




[Pageheading: LORD PALMERSTON'S GRATITUDE]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

STANHOPE STREET, _9th May 1839._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
to return your Majesty his grateful thanks for your Majesty's gracious
communication of this morning. It affords Viscount Palmerston the most
heart-felt satisfaction to know that his humble but zealous endeavours
to promote the interests of his country and to uphold the honour of
your Majesty's Crown, have had the good fortune to meet with your
Majesty's approbation; and he begs most respectfully to assure
your Majesty that the deep impression produced by the condescending
kindness which he has upon all occasions experienced from your Majesty
can never be effaced from his mind.




[Pageheading: THE HOUSEHOLD]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_9th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
suggest that if Sir Robert Peel presses for the dismissal of those of
your Household who are not in Parliament, you may observe that in so
doing he is pressing your Majesty more hardly than any Minister ever
pressed a Sovereign before.

When the Government was changed in 1830, the principal posts of the
Household were placed at the disposal of Lord Grey, but the Grooms and
Equerries were not removed.

When Sir Robert Peel himself became Minister in 1834, no part of the
Household were removed except those who were in Parliament.

When I became Prime Minister again in 1835, none of the Grooms or
Equerries were removed because none of them were in Parliament.

They press upon your Majesty, whose personal feelings ought from your
circumstances to be more consulted, a measure which no Minister before
ever pressed upon a Sovereign.

If this is put to him by your Majesty, Lord Melbourne does not see how
he can resist it.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _9th May 1839._

The Queen writes one line to prepare Lord Melbourne for what _may_
happen in a very few hours. Sir Robert Peel has behaved very ill,
and has insisted on my giving up my Ladies, to which I replied that I
never would consent, and I never saw a man so frightened. He said
he must go to the Duke of Wellington and consult with him, when both
would return, and he said this must suspend all further proceedings,
and he asked whether I should be ready to receive a decision, which I
said I should; he was quite perturbed--but this is _infamous_. I said,
besides many other things, that if he or the Duke of Wellington had
been at the head of the Government when I came to the Throne, perhaps
there might have been a few more Tory Ladies, but that then if you had
come into Office you would never have _dreamt_ of changing them. I was
calm but very decided, and I think you would have been pleased to see
my composure and great firmness; the Queen of England will not submit
to such trickery. Keep yourself in readiness, for you may soon be
wanted.




[Pageheading: PROPOSED NEW CABINET]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Thursday, 9th May 1839._

_At half-past two_ I saw the Duke of Wellington. I remained firm, and
he told Sir Robert that I remained firm. I then saw Sir Robert Peel,
who stopped a few minutes with me; he must consult those (of whom I
annex the List) whom he had named:

  THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON  _Secretary for Foreign Affairs_
  SIR JAMES GRAHAM        _Secretary for the Home Department_
  LORD STANLEY            _Secretary for the Colonies_
  LORD LYNDHURST          _Lord Chancellor_
  LORD ELLENBOROUGH       _President of the Board of Control_
  SIR H. HARDINGE         _Secretary at War_

and he said he would return in two or three hours with the result,
which I said I should await.[35]

    [Footnote 35: It was a curious circumstance, much commented
    on at the time, that in the _Globe_ of 9th May, a Ministerial
    evening paper, which would probably have gone to press at two
    o'clock in the afternoon, the following paragraph appeared:
    "The determination which it is well known Her Majesty has
    taken, not to allow the change in the Government to interfere
    with the ladies of her Court, has given great offence to the
    Tories."]




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _9th May 1839._

The Queen has received Lord Melbourne's letter. Lord Melbourne will
since have heard what has taken place. Lord Melbourne must not think
the Queen rash in her conduct; she saw both the Duke and Sir Robert
again, and declared to them she could not change her opinion. The
Ladies are not (as the Duke imagined was stated in the Civil List
Bill) in the _place_ of the Lords; and the Queen felt this was an
attempt to see whether she could be led and managed like a child;
if it should lead to Sir Robert Peel's refusing to undertake the
formation of the Government, which would be absurd, the Queen will
feel satisfied that she has only been defending her own rights, on
a point which so nearly concerned her person, and which, if they had
succeeded in, would have led to every sort of unfair attempt at power;
the Queen maintains _all_ her ladies,--and thinks her Prime Minister
will cut a sorry figure indeed if he resigns on this. Sir Robert is
gone to consult with his friends, and will return in two or three
hours with his decision. The Queen also maintained the Mistress of the
Robes, for as he said _only_ those who are _in Parliament_ shall be
removed, I should like to know if they mean to give the _Ladies_ seats
in Parliament?

We shall see what will be done. The Queen would not have _stood so
firmly_ on the Grooms and Equerries, but her _Ladies_ are _entirely_
her own affair, and _not_ the Ministers'.




[Pageheading: THE CRISIS]

_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_9th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Lord
Melbourne had certainly never expected that this demand would be
urged, and therefore had never advised your Majesty as to what was to
be done in such a case. Lord Melbourne strongly advises your Majesty
to hear what the Duke of Wellington and Sir Robert Peel urge, but to
take time before you come to a peremptory and final decision.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_9th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. This is a
matter of so much importance, and may have such grave results,
that any advice which Lord Melbourne could give would be of little
importance unless it coincided with the opinions of others, and
particularly of all those who were and intend still [to] continue to
be his colleagues.

It will depend upon their determination whether your Majesty is to be
supported or not. The best course will perhaps be that you should
hear Sir Robert Peel's determination, say nothing, but send for Lord
Melbourne, and lay the matter before him. Lord Melbourne will then
summon a Cabinet to consider of it.




[Pageheading: THE LADIES OF THE BEDCHAMBER]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_9th May 1839._

At half-past six came Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till ten
minutes past seven.


[Pageheading: THE LADIES]

I then began by giving him a detailed account of the whole proceeding,
which I shall state here as briefly as possible. I first again related
what took place in the two first interviews, and when I said that
the Duke said he had assisted my Government often very much, Lord
Melbourne said: "Well, that is true enough, but the Duke did all he
could about this vote." "Well, then," I said, "when Sir Robert Peel
came this morning, he began first about the Ministry. I consented,
though I said I might have my personal feelings about Lord Lyndhurst
and Lord Aberdeen, but that I would suppress every personal feeling
and be quite fair. I then repeated that I wished to retain about me
those who were not in Parliament, and Sir Robert _pretended_ that
I had the preceding day expressed a wish to keep about me those who
_were_ in Parliament. I mentioned my wish to have Lord Liverpool, to
which Sir Robert readily acceded, saying he would offer him the place
of Lord Steward, or of Lord in Waiting. He then suggested my
having Lord Ashley,[36] which I said I should like, as Treasurer or
Comptroller. Soon after this Sir Robert said: 'Now, about the Ladies,'
upon which I said I could _not_ give up _any_ of my Ladies, and
never had imagined such a thing. He asked if I meant to retain _all_.
'_All_,' I said. 'The Mistress of the Robes and the Ladies of the
Bedchamber?' I replied, '_All_,'--for he said they were the wives
of the opponents of the Government, mentioning Lady Normanby[37] in
particular as one of the late Ministers' wives. I said that would not
interfere; that I never talked politics with them, and that they
were related, many of them, to Tories, and I enumerated those of my
Bedchamber women and Maids of Honour; upon which he said he did not
mean _all_ the Bedchamber women and _all_ the Maids of Honour, he
meant the Mistress of the Robes and the Ladies of the Bedchamber; to
which I replied _they_ were of more consequence than the others, and
that I could _not_ consent, and that it had never been done before. He
said I was a Queen Regnant, and that made the difference. 'Not here,'
I said--and I maintained my right. Sir Robert then urged it upon
_public grounds only_, but I said here I could not consent. He then
begged to be allowed to consult with the Duke upon such an important
matter. I expressed a wish also to see the Duke, if Sir Robert
approved, which he said he did, and that he would return with the
Duke, if I would then be prepared for the decision, which I said I
would. Well," I continued, "the Duke and Sir Robert returned soon, and
I first saw the Duke, who talked first of his being ready to take the
post of Secretary for Foreign Affairs, which I had pressed Peel
to urge on him (the Duke having first wished to be in the Cabinet,
without accepting office), and the Duke said, 'I am able to do
anything,' for I asked him if it would not be too much for him. Then
I told him that I had been very well satisfied with Sir Robert
yesterday, and asked the Duke if Sir Robert had told him what had
passed about the Ladies. He said he had, and then I repeated all my
arguments, and the Duke his; but the Duke and Sir Robert differed
considerably on two points. The Duke said the _opinions_ of the Ladies
were nothing, but it was the _principle_, whether the Minister could
remove the Ladies or not, and that he (the Duke) had understood it was
stated in the Civil List Bill, 'that the _Ladies were instead of the
Lords_,' which is quite false, and I told the Duke that there were not
_twelve Lords_, as the expense _with the Ladies_ would have been too
great." Lord Melbourne said: "There you had the better of him,
and what did he say?" "Not much," I replied. I repeated many of my
arguments, all which pleased Lord Melbourne, and which he agreed to,
amongst others, that I said to the Duke, Was Sir Robert so weak that
_even_ the Ladies must be of his opinion? The Duke denied that. The
Duke then took my decision to Sir Robert, who was waiting in the next
room; after a few minutes Sir Robert returned. After stopping a
few minutes, as I have already stated, Sir Robert went to see his
colleagues, and returned at five: said he had consulted with those who
were to have been his colleagues, and that they agreed that, with
the probability of being beat the first night about the Speaker, and
beginning with a Minority in the House of Commons, that unless
there was _some_ (_all_ the Officers of State and Lords I gave up)
demonstration of my confidence, and if I retained all my Ladies
this would not be, "they agreed unanimously they could not go on." I
replied I would reflect, that I felt certain I should not change my
mind, but that I should do nothing in a hurry, and would write him my
decision either that evening or the next morning. He said, meanwhile,
he would suspend all further proceedings.

    [Footnote 36: Afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury, the well-known
    Philanthropist.]

    [Footnote 37: J. W. Croker wrote to the King of Hanover:--

    "_11th May 1839._

    "... This is the sum of the whole affair. Sir R. Peel could
    not admit that broad principle that all were to remain.
    Lady Normanby (whom the Queen particularly wishes for), for
    instance, the wife of the very Minister whose measures have
    been the cause of the change, two sisters of Lord Morpeth, the
    sisters-in-law of Lord John Russell, the daughter of the Privy
    Seal and the Chancellor of the Exchequer....

    "Her Majesty's ball last night was, I am told, rather dull,
    though she herself seemed in high spirits, as if she were
    pleased at retaining her Ministers. She has a great concert on
    the 13th, but to both, as I hear, the invitations have been on
    a very exclusive principle, no Tories being invited who could
    on any pretence be left out. These are small matters, but
    everything tends to create a public impression that Her
    Majesty takes a personal and strong interest in the Whigs--a
    new ingredient of difficulty."--_Croker Papers_, II. 347.]

I also told Lord Melbourne that I feared I had embarrassed the
Government; that I acted quite alone. Lord Melbourne saw, and said
I could not do otherwise. "I must summon the Cabinet," said Lord
Melbourne, at half-past nine. "It may have very serious consequences.
If we can't go on with this House of Commons, we may have to dissolve
Parliament, and we don't know if we may get as good a House of
Commons." I begged him to come, and he said: "I'll come if it is in
any time--if it's twelve; but if it's one or two, I'll write."

After dinner (as usual with the Household) I went to my room, and
sat up till a quarter past two. At a quarter to two I received the
following letter from Lord Melbourne, written at one o'clock:--




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S ULTIMATUM]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_10th May 1839_ (1 A.M.).

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. The Cabinet
has sate until now, and, after much discussion, advises your Majesty
to return the following answer to Sir Robert Peel:--

"The Queen having considered the proposal made to her yesterday by Sir
Robert Peel to remove the Ladies of her Bedchamber, cannot consent to
adopt a course which she conceives to be contrary to usage, and which
is repugnant to her feelings."[38]

    [Footnote 38: Greville asserts that the plan adopted by the
    outgoing Cabinet, of meeting and suggesting that this letter
    should be despatched, was "utterly anomalous and unprecedented,
    and a course as dangerous as unconstitutional.... They ought to
    have explained to her that until Sir Robert Peel had formally
    and finally resigned his commission into her hands, they could
    tender no advice.... The Cabinet of Lord Melbourne discussed
    the proposals of that of Sir Robert Peel, and they dictated to
    the Queen the reply in which she refused to consent to the
    advice tendered to her by the man who was _at that moment_ her
    Minister."--_Greville's Journal, 12th May 1839._]




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

_10th May 1839._

The Queen having considered the proposal made to her yesterday by Sir
Robert Peel, to remove the Ladies of her Bedchamber, cannot consent to
adopt a course which she conceives to be contrary to usage, and which
is repugnant to her feelings.[39]

    [Footnote 39: Sixty years later the Queen, during a
    conversation at Osborne with Sir Arthur Bigge, her Private
    Secretary, after eulogising Sir Robert Peel, said: "I was very
    young then, and perhaps I should act differently if it was all
    to be done again."]




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _10th May 1839._

The Queen wrote the letter before she went to bed, and sent it at
nine this morning; she has received no answer, and concludes she will
receive none, as Sir Robert told the Queen if the Ladies were not
removed, his party would fall directly, and could not go on, and that
he only awaited the Queen's decision. The Queen therefore wishes to
see Lord Melbourne about half-past twelve or one, if that would do.

The Queen fears Lord Melbourne has much trouble in consequence of all
this; but the Queen was fully prepared, and fully intended to give
these people a fair trial, though she always told Lord Melbourne she
knew they couldn't stand; and she must rejoice at having got out of
the hands of people who would have sacrificed every personal feeling
and instinct of the Queen's to their bad party purposes.

How is Lord Melbourne this morning?




[Pageheading: AN ANXIOUS WEEK]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _10th May 1839._

Half-past one will do as well as one; any hour will do that Lord
Melbourne likes, for the Queen will not go out.

There is no answer from Peel.

The Queen is wonderfully well, considering all the fatigue of
yesterday, and not getting to bed till near half-past two, which is
somewhat of a fatigue for to-night when the Queen must be very late.
Really all these Fêtes in the midst of such very serious and anxious
business are quite overwhelming.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _10th May 1839._

The Queen forgot to ask Lord Melbourne if he thought there would be
any harm in her writing to the Duke of Cambridge that she really was
fearful of fatiguing herself, if she went out to a party at Gloucester
House on Tuesday, an Ancient Concert on Wednesday, and a ball at
Northumberland House on Thursday, considering how much she had to do
these last four days. If she went to the Ancient Concert on Wednesday,
having besides a concert of her own here on Monday, it would be four
nights of fatigue, really exhausted as the Queen is.

But if Lord Melbourne thinks that as there are only to be English
singers at the Ancient Concert, she ought to go, she could go there
for one act; but she would much rather, if possible, get out of it,
for it is a fatiguing time....

As the negotiations with the Tories are quite at an end, and Lord
Melbourne _has been here_, the Queen hopes Lord Melbourne will not
object to dining with her on _Sunday_?




[Pageheading: RESIGNATION OF PEEL]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

_10th May 1839._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has had
the honour of receiving your Majesty's note of this morning.

In respectfully submitting to your Majesty's pleasure, and humbly
returning into your Majesty's hands the important trust which your
Majesty had been graciously pleased to commit to him, Sir Robert Peel
trusts that your Majesty will permit him to state to your Majesty his
impression with respect to the circumstances which have led to the
termination of his attempt to form an Administration for the conduct
of your Majesty's Service.

In the interview with which your Majesty honoured Sir Robert Peel
yesterday morning, after he had submitted to your Majesty the names of
those whom he proposed to recommend to your Majesty for the principal
executive appointments, he mentioned to your Majesty his earnest wish
to be enabled, with your Majesty's sanction, so to constitute your
Majesty's Household that your Majesty's confidential servants might
have the advantage of a public demonstration of your Majesty's full
support and confidence, and that at the same time, as far as possible
consistently with that demonstration, each individual appointment in
the Household should be entirely acceptable to your Majesty's personal
feelings.

On your Majesty's expressing a desire that the Earl of Liverpool[40]
should hold an office in the Household, Sir Robert Peel requested your
Majesty's permission at once to offer to Lord Liverpool the office of
Lord Steward, or any other which he might prefer.

Sir Robert Peel then observed that he should have every wish to apply
a similar principle to the chief appointments which are filled by
the Ladies of your Majesty's Household, upon which your Majesty
was pleased to remark that you must reserve the whole of those
appointments, and that it was your Majesty's pleasure that the whole
should continue as at present, without any change.

The Duke of Wellington, in the interview to which your Majesty
subsequently admitted him, understood also that this was your
Majesty's determination, and concurred with Sir Robert Peel in opinion
that, considering the great difficulties of the present crisis, and
the expediency of making every effort in the first instance to
conduct the public business of the country with the aid of the present
Parliament, it was essential to the success of the Commission with
which your Majesty had honoured Sir Robert Peel, that he should have
that public proof of your Majesty's entire support and confidence
which would be afforded by the permission to make some changes in
that part of your Majesty's Household which your Majesty resolved on
maintaining entirely without change.

Having had the opportunity through your Majesty's gracious
consideration, of reflecting upon this point, he humbly submits to
your Majesty that he is reluctantly compelled, by a sense of public
duty and of the interests of your Majesty's service, to adhere to his
opinion which he ventured to express to your Majesty.

He trusts he may be permitted at the same time to express to your
Majesty his grateful acknowledgments for the distinction which your
Majesty conferred upon him by requiring his advice and assistance in
the attempt to form an Administration, and his earnest prayers that
whatever arrangements your Majesty may be enabled to make for that
purpose may be most conducive to your Majesty's personal comfort and
happiness, and to the promotion of the public welfare.

    [Footnote 40: Charles Cecil Cope Jenkinson, third Earl,
    1784-1851, became Lord Steward in 1841.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S JOURNAL]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Friday, 10th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne came to me at two and stayed with me till ten minutes
to three. I placed in his hands Sir Robert Peel's answer, which he
read. He started at one part where he (Sir Robert) says, "_some_
changes"--but some or all, I said, was the same; and Lord Melbourne
said, "I must submit this to the Cabinet." Lord Melbourne showed me
a letter from Lord Grey about it--a good deal alarmed, thinking I
was right, and yet half doubtful; one from Spring Rice, dreadfully
frightened, and wishing the Whig ladies should resign; and one from
Lord Lansdowne wishing to state that the ladies would have resigned.
Lord Melbourne had also seen the Duke of Richmond, and Lord Melbourne
said we might be beat; I said I never would yield, and would never
apply to Peel again. Lord Melbourne said, "You are for standing
out, then?" I said, "Certainly." I asked how the Cabinet felt. "John
Russell, strongly for standing out," he said; "Duncannon, very
much so; Holland, Lord Minto, Hobhouse, and the Chancellor, all for
standing out; Poulett Thomson too, and Normanby also; S. Rice and
Howick alarmed."




[Pageheading: CABINET MINUTE]


CABINET MINUTE.

_Present._

  The LORD CHANCELLOR.
  The LORD PRESIDENT.
  The LORD PRIVY SEAL.
  VISCOUNT MELBOURNE.
  The MARQUIS OF NORMANBY.
  The EARL OF MINTO.
  The CHANCELLOR OF THE DUCHY OF LANCASTER.
  The LORD JOHN RUSSELL.
  The VISCOUNT PALMERSTON.
  The VISCOUNT HOWICK.
  The VISCOUNT MORPETH.
  Sir JOHN HOBHOUSE, Bart.
  The CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER.
  Mr. POULETT THOMSON.

Her Majesty's Confidential Servants having taken into consideration
the letter addressed by Her Majesty to Sir Robert Peel on the 10th of
May, and the reply of Sir Robert Peel of the same day, are of opinion
that for the purpose of giving to an Administration that character of
efficiency and stability and those marks of the constitutional support
of the Crown, which are required to enable it to act usefully for the
public service, it is reasonable that the great offices of the Court
and the situations in the Household held by members of either House of
Parliament should be included in the political arrangements made on a
change of Administration; but they are not of opinion that a similar
principle should be applied or extended to the offices held by Ladies
in Her Majesty's Household.[41]

    [Footnote 41: This paragraph was read by Lord John Russell
    to the House of Commons during the course of the Ministerial
    explanations on 13th May.]

Her Majesty's Confidential Servants are therefore prepared to support
Her Majesty in refusing to assent to the removal of the Ladies of her
Household, which Her Majesty conceived to be contrary to usage, and
which is repugnant to her feelings, and are prepared to continue in
their offices on these grounds.

Viscount Howick concurs in the opinion expressed in the foregoing
Minute that the removal of the Ladies of Her Majesty's Household
ought not to form part of the arrangements consequent upon a change
of Administration, and shares in the readiness his colleagues have
declared to support Her Majesty in acting upon this opinion; but
he thinks it his duty to state his conviction that the immediate
resumption of their offices by Her Majesty's Confidential Servants is
not the mode in which their support can be most effectively afforded
and is not calculated to promote the good of Her Majesty's service.

He conceives that before it is determined that the present
Administration should be continued, further explanation should be
sought with Sir Robert Peel, by which it is not impossible that his
concession to Her Majesty's just objection to the removal of the
Ladies of her Household might have been obtained, while the endeavour
to arrive at this result, even though unsuccessful, would at all
events tend to secure additional support to Her Majesty's present
Servants, and thus to enable them to surmount those difficulties,
which have recently compelled them humbly to tender their resignations
to Her Majesty, and which he fears will be found not to have been
diminished by the course it has now been determined to pursue.

In humbly submitting this opinion to Her Majesty, Viscount Howick begs
permission to add that he nevertheless acquiesces in the determination
of his colleagues, and will render them the best assistance in his
power in their endeavour to carry on Her Majesty's service.




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE RESUMES OFFICE]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _11th May 1839._

The Queen is very anxious to hear that Lord Melbourne has not suffered
from the ball last night, as it was very hot at first. The beginning
was rather dull and heavy, but after supper it got very animated, and
we kept it up till a quarter past three; the Queen enjoyed herself
very much and isn't at all tired; she felt much the kindness of many
of her kind friends, who are her _only real_ friends. Lady Cowper and
Lord and Lady Minto, the Duchess of Somerset, and Lord Anglesey were
particularly kind. On the other hand, there were some gloomy faces to
be seen, and the Duchess of Gloucester was very cross.

The Queen is ashamed to say it, but she has forgotten _when_ she
appointed the Judge Advocate; when will the Cabinet be over?

The Queen danced the first and the last dance with the Grand Duke,[42]
made him sit near her, and tried to be very civil to him, and I
think we are great friends already and get on very well; I like him
exceedingly.

    [Footnote 42: The Hereditary Grand Duke of Russia, afterwards
    the Emperor Alexander II.]




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _12th May 1839._

The Queen anxiously hopes Lord Melbourne is quite well this morning,
and has _not_ suffered from the dinner at Pozzo's.

The Queen wishes to know if she ought to say anything to the Duchess,
of the noble manner in which her Government mean to stand by her? The
account in the _Observer_ of the whole proceeding is the most correct
both as to details and facts, that the Queen has yet seen; were they
told what to put in? There was considerable applause when the Queen
entered the Theatre, which she, however, thought best and most
delicate not to encourage, and she was cheered when she drove up to
the Theatre and got out, which she never is in general.

The Grand Duke came and sat with the Queen in her box, for at least
half an hour last night--and the Queen asked him if he knew exactly
what had happened, which he said he did not--and the Queen accordingly
gave him an account of what passed, and he was _shocked_ at Sir Robert
Peel's proposal, thought his resignation on that account absurd, and
was delighted at the continuance in office of my present Government.

The Queen supposes and fears that Lord Melbourne dines with the
Lansdownes to-morrow, but she wishes to know if Wednesday, Saturday,
and Sunday would suit him?

Lord Melbourne must not forget the List of our supporters in the
House of Commons, which the Queen is very anxious to have as soon as
possible. If Lord Melbourne can dine here to-morrow the Queen would be
glad, of course.




[Pageheading: LORD JOHN RUSSELL'S OPINION]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_13th May 1839._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that he this day made his statement to the House,
in answer to Sir Robert Peel.

Sir Robert Peel made a skilful, and not unfair statement. He, however,
spoke only of his intention of changing some of the Ladies of the
Bedchamber. But he did not say that he had made this intention clear
to your Majesty; only that he had so arranged the matter with his
political friends. The popular impression is greatly in favour of the
course pursued by your Majesty.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_14th May 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is most
sorry to hear that your Majesty does not feel well. It is very natural
that your Majesty does not. Lord Melbourne does not believe that there
was anything wanting in your Majesty's manner yesterday evening,[43]
but depend upon it, if there was, every allowance would be made for
the fatigue and anxiety which your Majesty has gone through, and for
the painful and embarrassing situation in which your Majesty is still
placed.

Lord Melbourne will wait upon your Majesty at two, and will have the
honour of conversing with your Majesty upon Peel's speech.

    [Footnote 43: At the State Concert.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S VIEW]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _14th May 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I begin to think you have forgotten me, and you will
think I have forgotten you, but I am certain you will have guessed the
cause of my silence. How much has taken place since Monday the 7th
to yesterday the 13th. You will have easily imagined how dreadful
the resignation of my Government--and particularly of that truly
inestimable and excellent man, Lord Melbourne--was for me, and you
will have felt for me! What I suffered I cannot describe! To have to
take people whom I should have no confidence in, ... was most painful
and disagreeable; but I felt I must do it, and made up my mind to
it--nobly advised and supported by Lord Melbourne, whose character
seems to me still more perfect and noble since I have gone through all
this.

I sent for the Duke of Wellington, who referred me to Peel, whom I
accordingly saw.

Everything fair and just I assented to, even to having Lord Lyndhurst
as Chancellor, and Sir H. Hardinge and Lord Ellenborough in the
Cabinet; I insisted upon the Duke in the Foreign Office, instead
of Lord Aberdeen.... All this I granted, as also to give up all the
Officers of State and all those of my Household who are in Parliament.

When to my utter astonishment he asked me to change my Ladies--my
principal Ladies!--this I of course refused; and he upon _this
resigned_, saying, as he felt he should be beat the very first night
upon the Speaker, and having to begin with a minority, that unless he
had this demonstration of my confidence he could not go on!

You will easily imagine that I firmly resisted this attack upon my
power, from these people who pride themselves upon upholding the
prerogative! I acted quite alone, but I have been, and shall be,
supported by my country, who are very enthusiastic about it, and
loudly cheered me on going to church on Sunday. My Government have
nobly stood by me, and have resumed their posts, strengthened by the
feelings of the country....

Pray tell my dearest Aunt that I really cannot write to her to-day,
for you have no conception of what I have to do, for there are balls,
concerts, and dinners all going on besides. Adieu! my beloved Uncle.
Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: APPROVAL OF KING LEOPOLD]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _17th May 1839._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I feel deeply grateful for your very kind and
interesting letter, which reached me yesterday, inclusive of the
papers.

You have passed a time of great agitation and difficulty, which will,
however, contribute to enlarge the circle of your experience. _I
approve very highly of the whole mode in which you proceeded_;
you acted with great _good faith_ and _fairness_, and when finally
propositions were made which you considered you could not submit to,
you were very right to resist them. The march of the whole affair is
very clear and fair, and does you _great credit_.... Peel in making
his demand misjudged you; he remembered George IV., and even the late
King, and dreamt of Court influence of people near the Sovereign. You
have the great merit, for which you cannot be too much praised, of
being _extremely honest_ and honourable in your dealings. If you had
kept Peel, you would have acted honestly by him, without any Lady's
having a chance of doing him a bad turn. When he asked the measure
as an expression of your great confidence in him, it was not fair,
because _you_ had not wished to take him; he was forced upon you, and
therefore, even if you had granted his request, nobody would have seen
in it a proof of your confidence in him, but rather a sacrifice to a
far-stretched pretence.

Besides, that he was to have encountered difficulties as a Minister
was partly the consequence of the policy of his party, and you were
not bound to give him any assistance beyond what he had a right to ask
as a Minister. I was sure that Lord Melbourne would give you both the
fairest and the most honourable advice in this painful crisis. He was
kind enough last year to speak to me on the subject, and I could but
approve what he said on the subject. Altogether, keeping now your
old Ministers, you will have reason to congratulate yourself on the
result; it is likely to strengthen them, by showing the Radicals what
may be the consequences.

Rumour spoke of their wishing to add some Radicals to the Cabinet;
I don't see that they could improve the Ministry by it, which is
perfectly well composed as it is at present, and new elements often
have a dissolving effect. It was very kind of you to have explained
everything so clearly to me, but I deserve it for the _great interest_
I take in all that concerns you....




[Pageheading: A SMALL LIBERAL MAJORITY]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_6th June 1839._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that Sir Robert Peel's Bill[44] was discussed
yesterday in the House of Commons, with great fairness and an entire
absence of party spirit.

Viscount Melbourne will have acquainted your Majesty with the result
of the Cabinet of yesterday. It appears to Lord John Russell that the
Liberal party, with some explanation, will be satisfied with the
state of things for the present, and that the great difficulties which
attend the complete union of the majority will be deferred till
the commencement of next Session. It is always well to have some
breathing-time.

    [Footnote 44: The Jamaica Bill for the temporary suspension of
    the Constitution.]




_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _11th June 1839._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that the division of last night was extremely
encouraging to the future prospects of the Government.

Combined with the division on the Speakership,[45] it shows that the
Liberal party have still a clear though small majority in the House
of Commons, and that it may probably not be necessary to resort to a
dissolution. Indeed, such a measure in present circumstances would be
of very doubtful issue.

Lord John Russell stated last night that he would not divide on the
Canada resolutions, but move for leave to bring in a Bill.

    [Footnote 45: Mr Shaw Lefevre was elected by 317 against 299
    for Mr Goulburn.]




_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_6th July 1839._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that Mr. Rice yesterday brought forward his
financial statement with great ability.

He moved a resolution in favour of a penny postage, which Sir Robert
Peel declared it to be his intention to oppose on the report. This
will be on Friday next. This seems a mistake on the part of the
Opposition.[46]

    [Footnote 46: The penny postage scheme came into operation on
    10th January 1840.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN AND PRINCE ALBERT]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _12th July 1839._ (_20 minutes to 12._)

The Queen is really quite shocked to see that her box was taken to
Lord Melbourne to Park Lane, and she fears (by the manner in which
Lord Melbourne's note is written) that he was at dinner at Lady
Elizabeth H. Vere's when he got it. The Queen had imagined that the
House of Lords was still sitting, and therefore desired them to take
the box there, but never had intended it should follow him to dinner;
she begs Lord Melbourne to excuse this mistake which must have
appeared so strange.

Did the dinner go off well at Lady Elizabeth H. Vere's, and were there
many people there? Did Lord Melbourne go to Lady R. Grosvenor's party
or did he go home?

The Queen hopes Lord Melbourne is quite well and not tired.

Monday at two o'clock for the Judge Advocate.

The Queen hears Lady Sandwich is very much delighted at her
appointment.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _15th July 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I have no letter from you, but hope to get one
soon....

I shall send this letter by a courier, as I am anxious to put several
questions to you, and to mention some feelings of mine upon the
subject of my cousins' visit, which I am desirous should not
transpire. First of all, I wish to know if _Albert_ is aware of the
wish of his _Father_ and _you_ relative to _me?_ Secondly, if he knows
that there is _no engagement_ between us? I am anxious that you should
acquaint Uncle Ernest, that if I should like Albert, that I can make
_no final promise this year_, for, at the _very earliest_, any such
event could not take place till _two or three years hence_. For,
independent of my youth, and my _great_ repugnance to change my
present position, there is _no anxiety_ evinced in _this country_ for
such an event, and it would be more prudent, in my opinion, to wait
till some such demonstration is shown,--else if it were hurried it
might produce discontent.

Though all the reports of Albert are most favourable, and though
I have little doubt I shall like him, still one can never answer
beforehand for _feelings_, and I may not have the _feeling_ for him
which is requisite to ensure happiness. I _may_ like him as a friend,
and as a _cousin_, and as a _brother_, but not _more_; and should this
be the case (which is not likely), I am _very_ anxious that it should
be understood that I am _not_ guilty of any breach of promise, for
_I never gave any_. I am sure you will understand my anxiety, for I
should otherwise, were this not completely understood, be in a very
painful position. As it is, I am rather nervous about the visit, for
the subject I allude to is not an agreeable one to me. I have little
else to say, dear Uncle, as I have now spoken openly to you, which I
was very, _very anxious_ to do.

You will be at Paris, I suppose, when you get this letter, and I
therefore beg you to lay me at the feet of the whole family, and to
believe me ever your very devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _20th July 1839._

The Queen anxiously hopes Lord Melbourne has slept well, and has not
suffered from last night. It was very wrong of him not to wish the
Queen good-night, as she expected he would in so small a party, for
she _saw_ that he did _not_ go away immediately after supper. When
did he get home? It was great pleasure to the Queen that he came last
night. We kept up the dancing till past three, and the Queen was much
amused, and slept soundly from four till half-past ten, which she is
ashamed of. She is quite well, but has got a good deal of cold in her
head; she hopes to see Lord Melbourne at two.




[Pageheading: THE DUCHESS OF BRAGANZA]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _25th July 1839._

The Queen has seen the Duchess of Braganza,[47] who, though a good
deal changed, is still handsome, and very amiable; she seemed so glad,
too, to see the Queen again. The child[48] is grown a dear fine girl.
Lord Palmerston thought it right that I should ask her to dinner also
on Saturday and take her to the Opera; and on Sunday, as she came on
purpose to see the Queen, and goes on Monday.

On Sunday (besides Lord Melbourne) the Queen proposes asking
Palmerston, Normanby, Uxbridge, and Surrey, and no one else except the
Duchess's suite. The Queen hopes Lord Melbourne will approve of this.
He will not forget to let the Queen know how the debate is going on,
at about nine or ten, as she will be curious to know. She trusts he
will not suffer from the fatigue of to-night.

    [Footnote 47: The step-mother of Donna Maria. Pedro I. assumed
    the title of Duke of Braganza after his abdication.]

    [Footnote 48: Probably the princess known as "Chica,"
    afterwards Princesse de Joinville.]




[Pageheading: SYRIAN AFFAIRS]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

ST CLOUD, _26th July 1839._

... Everything is pretty quiet, and the _grâce accordée à Barbès_[49]
has put down the rage against the King personally, at least for some
little time. The affairs of the Orient interest a good deal. I think
that it is better the Porte should be on a favourable footing with
Mehemet Ali than if that gentleman had pushed on in arms, as it will
put the _casus foederis_ out of the question, and the Turks will not
call in the assistance of the Russians. Whoever pushed the late Sultan
into this war has done an act of great folly, as it could only bring
the Porte into jeopardy.

    [Footnote 49: Armand Barbès, the leader of a fatal riot
    in Paris, was sentenced to death, a sentence afterwards
    remitted.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_3rd August 1839._

Lord Melbourne will wait upon your Majesty at a quarter before five,
if possible, but there is much to discuss at the Cabinet. The Caspian
Pasha has taken the Turkish fleet to Alexandria,[50] and Mehemet Ali
says that he will not give it up to the Sultan until he dismisses the
Grand Vizier, and acknowledges the hereditary right of the Pasha to
the countries which he at present governs. This is to make the Sultan
his subject and his vassal.

The accounts from Birmingham are by no means good.[51] There has
been no disturbance of the peace, but the general disposition is both
violent and determined.

    [Footnote 50: The Viceroy of Egypt had revolted against the
    Porte, and on 8th June the Sultan purported to deprive him and
    Ibrahim, his son, of their dignities. War was declared,
    and the Turkish fleet despatched to Syria. But the Admiral
    treacherously sailed to Alexandria, and the Ottoman troops,
    under Hafiz, who had succeeded Mehemet Ali in the Government
    of Egypt, were utterly routed. With the traitorous conduct
    of the Turkish admiral, Disraeli, a few years later, compared
    Peel's conversion to Free Trade.]

    [Footnote 51: Chartist riots were very frequent at the time.
    _See_ Introductory Note, _ante_, p. 141. (to Ch. VIII)]




[Pageheading: THE OPERA]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _4th August 1839._

The Queen hopes Lord Melbourne is quite well this morning, and did not
sit up working very late last night; the Queen met him twice yesterday
in the Park, and really wondered how anybody _could_ ride, for she
came home much hotter than she went out, and thought the air quite
like as if it came out of an oven; to-day we can breathe again. It was
intensely hot at the Opera; the Queen-Dowager visited the Queen in her
box, as did also the young Grand Duke of Weimar, who is just returned
from Scotland, and whom the Queen has asked to come after dinner
to-morrow. The Queen has not asked the Duke of Sussex to come after
dinner to-morrow, as she thought he would be bored by such a sort of
party; does not Lord Melbourne think so? and she means to ask him to
dinner soon.

The Queen has not asked Lord Melbourne about any days this week
besides to-morrow (when she trusts he may be able to come, but she
does not know what there is in the House) and Wednesday; but perhaps
Lord Melbourne will consent to leave Thursday and Friday open in
_case_ he should be able to come one or both of those days.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _4th August 1839._

The Queen has just received Lord Melbourne's letter; and wishes to
know if Lord Melbourne means by "to-day" that he is also coming to
see her _this afternoon_, (which she does not expect) as well as _this
evening_? for she did _not_ ask him in her note of this morning _if_
he would come to-night (for she felt _sure_ of that), but if he could
come _to-morrow_, about which he has not answered her, as to whether
he expects there will be anything of great length in the House of
Lords. Lord Melbourne will forgive the Queen's troubling him again,
but she felt a little puzzled by his letter; she sent him a card for
Wednesday without previously asking him, as she thought that would
suit him, and hopes it does?

The Queen will follow Lord Melbourne's advice respecting the Duke of
Sussex.

We have just returned from hearing not only a very long, and very bad,
but also, a very ludicrous, sermon.

The heat is somewhat less, but the Queen is undecided as to driving
out or not.




[Pageheading: KING LOUIS PHILIPPE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _9th August 1839._

... I am sorry that you are less pleased with the old Duke, but party
spirit is in England an incurable disease. These last two years he had
rendered essential service to the present Administration; perhaps he
has been soured by last summer's events. It was my intention to have
answered your questions sooner, but from Paris I had not the means.
Now the time draws so near when I hope to have the happiness of seeing
you, that I think it will be better to treat the matter verbally, the
more so as my most beloved Majesty is easily displeased with what may
be written with the best intention, instead that in conversation the
immediate reply renders any misunderstanding, however small, very
difficult; and as I do not wish to have any great or small with you,
and see no occasion for it, I will give my answer _de vive voix_.

Now comes a subject which will _astonish_ you. I am charged _de
sonder_ your will and pleasure on the following subject. The King my
father-in-law goes to Eu, where he hopes to remain till the 5th or 6th
of September. Having at his disposition some very fine steamers, his
great wish would be to go over to Brighton, just for one afternoon and
night, to offer you his respects in person. He would in such a
case bring with him the Queen, my Aunt, Clémentine,[52] Aumale and
Montpensier. The first step in this business is to know what
your pleasure is, and to learn that very frankly, as he perfectly
understands that, however short such a visit, it must be submitted to
the advice even of some of your Ministers. What renders the thing very
difficult, in my opinion, is that in a country like France, and with
so many Ministerial difficulties, the King to the _last hour_ will
hardly know if he can undertake the thing. As, however, the first
object is to know your will, he begged me to ascertain that, and to
tell you that if you had the _smallest objection_ you would not be
carried away by the apprehension of hurting him by telling me honestly
that you did _not_ see how the affair could be arranged, but to speak
out, that he knew enough how often objections may arise, and that even
with himself he could only be sure of the thing at the last moment.

    [Footnote 52: Who afterwards married Queen Victoria's cousin,
    Prince Augustus (Gusti) of Coburg.]



[Pageheading: THE NEW SULTAN]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _19th August 1839._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and in
submitting the accompanying private letter from the Earl Granville[53]
begs to state that neither Viscount Melbourne nor Viscount Palmerston
are of opinion that it would be expedient that your Majesty should
send an Ambassador Extraordinary to compliment the young Sultan[54]
on his accession. The circumstances connected with his accession are
indeed fitter matter for condolence than for congratulation, and he
would probably be better pleased by the restoration of his fleet than
by the arrival of Ambassadors Extraordinary. Moreover, it has not been
customary for the Sovereign of England to send such missions upon the
accession of Sultans.

    [Footnote 53: The first Earl Granville (1773-1846), formerly
    Ambassador Extraordinary to the Russian Court, at this time
    Ambassador at Paris.]

    [Footnote 54: Abdul Medjid, a lad of sixteen, succeeded the
    Sultan Mahmoud. The majority of the Powers agreed to place him
    under the protection of Europe, and to warn Mehemet Ali
    that the matter was for Europe, not him, to decide. France,
    however, wished to support Mehemet, and direct the Alliance
    against Russia. But Nicholas I. of Russia was prepared to
    support England as far as regarded the affairs of Turkey and
    Egypt, and to close the Dardanelles and Bosphorus to warships
    of all nations, it being stipulated that Russian ships of war
    only were to pass the Bosphorus, as acting under the mandate
    of Europe in defence of the Turks. _See_ further, Introductory
    Notes for 1839 and 1840. (to Ch. VIII and Ch. IX)]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

OSTENDE, _24th August 1839._

... The King's intention would be to leave Eu in the evening, let us
say at eight or nine o'clock, and to land, perhaps at ten or eleven,
at Brighton on the _following morning_. He would have the honour of
dining with you, and would re-embark in the _evening of the same day_,
so as to be back on the _following morning_ at Eu. He will therefore,
as you see, _not_ sleep in England.

If you cannot give any _pied-à-terre_ in the Palace for these few
hours, they will remain in an hotel. But I must say that as the King
and Queen put themselves to _some inconvenience in coming_ to see
you, it would be _rather desirable_ to offer them rooms in the Palace,
which I think might be easily managed. As far as we are concerned, it
_does not matter_ if we are housed in an hotel or where we bivouac. I
will charge Van de Weyer to take rooms for us somewhere....

Do not imagine that I have done the least to bring this about for my
own satisfaction, which is _very limited_ in this business, but the
King wished _much to see you once_, and so did the Queen, who abhors
sailing more than anybody, and this is perhaps the _only_ opportunity
which may ever offer of doing it, even with some political benefit, as
it certainly is desirable that it should appear that the two maritime
Powers are on good terms.... And now, God bless you! Ever, my dearest
Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.





[Pageheading: LOUIS PHILIPPE'S VISIT]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

OSTENDE, _25th August 1839._ (_La St Louis._)

MY DEAR VICTORIA,--To keep up the fire of letters, I write again,
having received this morning interesting news. As I must forward
this letter by Calais, and know not who may read it in these times of
curiosity, I am forced to be guarded; but the news are as follows,
of the 23rd--curious coincidence, as your letter was also of that
date--that, the moment _approaching, many and serious_ difficulties
arise, and that the expedition was considered imprudent by some
people, that, besides, the presence would perhaps be required,
before the _possible_ departure, at the _usual home_ of the person
interested, that therefore for the present it would perhaps be best to
give it up. I must say that I am _most happy_ that matters have come
to this pass, because it would have been next to impossible to arrange
affairs properly in proper time. You may now consider everything _as
over_, and settle your plans without reference to it....




[Pageheading: THE VISIT POSTPONED]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _26th August 1839._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I had already written you a letter when I received
your two very kind ones, and I shall therefore not send my first. My
friendship for the dear King and Queen makes me, as you may easily
understand, wish most exceedingly to see them and to make the
acquaintance of the Queen and all the family. And I feel the immense
kindness of them all in wishing to see me, and in coming over for only
a few hours. Politically it would be _wished_ by _us all_, and the
_only_ difficulty I see is the following, which is, that _I do not
feel quite_ equal to going to Brighton and receiving them all, so soon
after the Prorogation.[55] I do not _feel_ well; I feel _thoroughly_
exhausted from all that I have gone through this Session, and am quite
knocked up by the two little trips I made to Windsor. This makes me
fear, uncertain as it all is, with such a pressure of business, so
many affairs, and with so much going on, that I should be unequal to
the journey and the whole thing. This, and this _alone_, could make me
express a wish that this most kind visit should take place _next_
year instead of this year. I feel such regret really in saying this--I
should so wish to see them, and yet I feel I am not _quite_ up to
it. You will understand me, dear Uncle, I am certain, as I know the
anxiety you always express for my health. For _once_ I _long_ to leave
London, and shall do so on Friday. If you could be at Windsor by the
4th, I should be delighted.

The dear Ferdinands, whom I _all dearly_ love, will await you here.
I have had so much to do and so many people to see, that I feel quite
confused, and have written shockingly, which you must forgive. Ever
your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 55: On 27th August.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S SPEECH]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _26 August 1839._ (_10 minutes to 12._)

The Queen has received both Lord Melbourne's notes; she was a good
deal vexed at his not coming, as she had begged him herself to do so,
and as he wrote to say he would, and also as she thinks it right and
of importance that Lord Melbourne should be here at large dinners; the
Queen _insists_ upon his coming to dinner to-morrow, and also begs him
to do so on Wednesday, her two last nights in town, and as she will
probably not see him at all for two days when she goes on Friday;
the Queen would wish to see Lord Melbourne _after_ the Prorogation
to-morrow at any hour _before_ five he likes best.

The Queen has been a good deal annoyed this evening at Normanby's
telling her that John Russell was coming to town next Monday in order
to _change_ with _him_.[56] Lord Melbourne _never_ told the Queen that
this was definitely settled; on the contrary, he said it would "remain
in our hands," to use Lord Melbourne's own words, and only be settled
during the Vacation; considering all that the Queen has said on the
subject to Lord Melbourne, and considering the great confidence the
Queen has in Lord Melbourne, she thinks and feels he ought to have
told her that this was _settled_, and not let the Queen be the
last person to hear what is settled and done in her own name; Lord
Melbourne will excuse the Queen's being a little eager about this, but
it has happened once before that she learnt from other people what had
been decided on.

The Queen has such unlimited confidence in Lord Melbourne that she
knows all that he does is right, but she cannot help being a little
vexed at not being told things, when she is accustomed to great
confidence on Lord Melbourne's part.

Lord Melbourne may rely on the Queen's secrecy respecting Howick; he
knows the Queen always keeps things to herself; Normanby hinted at his
wish to get rid of Howick.

The Speech is safely arrived, has been read over twice, and shall not
be forgotten to-morrow; the Queen wishes they would not use such thin
and slippery paper--for it is difficult to hold with nervous, and, as
Lord Melbourne knows, _shaking_ hands. The Queen trusts Lord Melbourne
will be less tired in the morning.

    [Footnote 56: _See_ Introductory Note, _ante_, p. 141. (to Ch. VIII)]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

OSTENDE, _21st September 1839._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--Your _delightful_ little letter has just arrived
and went like _an arrow to my heart._ Yes, my beloved Victoria! I _do
love you tenderly_, and with all the power of affection which is often
found in characters who do not make much outward show of it. I love
you _for yourself_, and I love in you the dear child whose welfare I
carefully watched. My great wish is always that you should _know_
that I am _desirous_ of _being useful_ to you, without _hoping for
any other return_ than some little affection from your warm and kind
heart. I am even so far pleased that my eternal political affairs are
settled, as it takes away the _last possibility_ of imagining that I
may want something or other. I have all the honours that can be given,
and I am, politically speaking, very solidly established, more so than
most Sovereigns in Europe. The only political longing I still have
is for the Orient, where I perhaps shall once end my life, unlike
the sun, rising in the West and setting in the East. I never press
my services on you, nor my councils, though I may say with some truth
that from the extraordinary fate which the higher Powers had ordained
for me, my experience, both political and of private life, is great. I
am _always ready_ to be useful to you _when and where_ it may be, and
I repeat it, _all I want in return is some little sincere affection
from you_....

And now I conclude for to-day, not without expressing again my
satisfaction and pleasure at having seen you yesterday morning with
your dear honest face, looking so dear in your morning attire. Our
time was spent very satisfactorily, and only the weather crossed our
wishes, and to that one can submit when everything else is delightful.
Once more, God bless you! Ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted
Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: VISIT OF PRINCE ALBERT]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _25th September 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--You will, I think, laugh when you get this letter,
and will think I only mean to employ you in _stopping_ my relations at
Brussels, but I think you will approve of my wish. In the first place
I don't think one can _reckon_ on the Cousins arriving here on the
30th. Well, all I want is that _you_ should detain them one or two
days longer, in order that they may arrive here on _Thursday, the
3rd_, if possible _early_. My reason for this is as follows: a number
of the Ministers are coming down here on Monday to stay till Thursday,
on affairs of great importance, and as you know that people are always
on the alert to make remarks, I think if _all_ the Ministers were to
be down here when they arrive, people would say--it was to _settle
matters_. At all events it is better to avoid this. I think indeed a
day or two at Brussels will do these young gentlemen good, and
they can be properly fitted out there for their visit. Ever yours
devotedly,

VICTORIA R.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _1st October 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I received your kind letter on Sunday, for which many
thanks. The _retard_ of these young people puts me rather out, but of
course cannot be helped. I had a letter from Albert yesterday saying
they could not set off, he thought, before the 6th. I think they don't
exhibit much _empressement_ to come here, which rather shocks me.

I got a very nice letter from dear Alexander yesterday from
Reinhardtsbrun;[57] he says Albert is very much improved, but not
taller than Augustus. His description of him is as follows:--"Albert,
I found, had become stronger and more handsome; still he has not grown
much taller; he is of about the same size as Augustus; he is a most
pleasant, intelligent young man. I find, too, that he has become more
lively than he was, and that sits well on him, too." (_Translation._)
I think you may like to hear this, as I know Alexander is a very
correct observer of persons, and his opinion may be relied upon. He
adds that Albert plagues Leopold beyond measure.

I shall take care and send a gentleman and carriages to meet my
cousins, either at Woolwich or the Tower, at whichever place you
inform me they land at. The sooner they come the better. I have got
the house _full_ of Ministers. On Monday the Queen Dowager is coming
to sleep here for two nights; it is the _first time_, and will be a
severe trial. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 57: A picturesque castle, about eight miles from
    Gotha.]




[Pageheading: A CHARM AGAINST EVIL]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _7th October 1839._

The Queen sends the little _charm_ which she hopes may keep Lord
Melbourne from _all evil_, and which it will make her very happy if he
will put [? it with] his keys. If the ring is too small Lord Melbourne
must send it back to her, and she will have it altered.

The Queen has made up her mind at length to ask Lady Clanricarde, as
Lord Melbourne wishes it so much. Shall Surrey invite her, or Lord
Palmerston? and from Thursday to Friday?




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _8th October 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I have to thank you for three kind letters of the 1st,
4th, and 5th, the last which I received yesterday. I received another
letter from Alex. M. yesterday, _since Ernest's arrival_, and he says
that they have determined on setting off, so as to embark at Antwerp
on the 9th and be here after all on the 10th! I suppose you will have
also heard. I shall therefore (unless I hear from you to the contrary)
send one of my equerries and two carriages to the Tower on _Thursday_.

I am sorry to hear of the serious disturbances at Ghent; I trust it
is all got under now. If you should hear anything more of Roi
Guillaume's[58] marriage, pray let me hear it, as it is such an odd
story. Old Alava, who was here for two nights last week, told me he
knew _Pauline d'Oultremont_ many years ago, when she was young and
very gay and pretty, but that he wonders much at this marriage, as the
King hates Catholics. Alava is _rayonnant de bonheur_.

I told Lord Melbourne of your alarms respecting the financial crisis,
which _we_ did not bring on--those wild American speculations are the
cause of it--and he desires me to assure you that we will pursue as
moderate and cautious a course as possible.

The Queen Dowager came here yesterday and stays till to-morrow; she is
very cheerful and in good spirits....

I must conclude in haste. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Many thanks for the two supplies of ortolans, which were delicious.

    [Footnote 58: William I., King of the Netherlands, was greatly
    attached to the Roman Catholic Countess d'Oultremont, and in
    October 1840, being sixty-seven, abdicated his Crown to marry
    her. He was father of the Prince of Orange, who succeeded
    him.]




[Pageheading: ARRIVAL OF PRINCE ALBERT]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _12th October 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--... The dear cousins arrived at half-past seven on
Thursday, after a very bad and almost dangerous passage, but looking
both very well, and much improved. Having no clothes, they could not
appear at dinner, but nevertheless _débutéd_ after dinner in their
_négligé_. Ernest is grown quite handsome; Albert's _beauty_ is
_most striking_, and he so amiable and unaffected--in short, very
_fascinating_; he is excessively admired here. The Granvilles and Lord
Clanricarde[59] happened just to be here, but are gone again to-day.
We rode out yesterday and danced after dinner. The young men are very
amiable, delightful companions, and I am very happy to have them here;
they are playing some Symphonies of Haydn _under_ me at this very
moment; they are passionately fond of music.

In the way of news I have got nothing to tell you to-day. Everything
is quiet here, and we have no particular news from abroad. In Spain
the Fueros[60] seem to give sad difficulty to the Cortes.

Ever, my dearest Uncle, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 59: Ulick John, first Marquis of Clanricarde
    (1802-1874), Ambassador at St Petersburg, afterwards Lord
    Privy Seal.]

    [Footnote 60: Certain rights and privileges of the Basques.]




[Pageheading: A MOMENTOUS DECISION]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _15th October 1839._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--This letter will, I am sure, give you pleasure,
for you have always shown and taken so warm an interest in all that
concerns me. My mind is quite made up--and I told Albert this morning
of it; the warm affection he showed me on learning this gave me
_great_ pleasure. He seems _perfection_, and I think that I have the
prospect of very great happiness before me. I _love_ him _more_ than I
can say, and I shall do everything in my power to render the sacrifice
he has made (for a _sacrifice_ in my opinion it is) as small as I
can. He seems to have a very great tact--a very necessary thing in his
position. These last few days have passed like a dream to me, and I
am so much bewildered by it all that I know hardly how to write; but I
_do_ feel _very_, _very_ happy.

It is absolutely necessary that this determination of mine should be
known to _no one_ but yourself, and Uncle Ernest--till the meeting of
Parliament--as it would be considered otherwise neglectful on my part
not to have assembled Parliament at once to have informed them of
it.... Lord Melbourne, whom I of course have consulted about the whole
affair, quite approves my choice, and expresses great satisfaction
at the event, which he thinks in every way highly desirable. Lord
Melbourne has acted in this business, as he has always done towards
me, with the greatest kindness and affection.

We also think it better, and Albert quite approves of it, that
we should be married very soon after Parliament meets, about the
beginning of February; and indeed, loving Albert as I do, I cannot
wish it should be delayed. My feelings are a _little_ changed, I must
say, since last Spring, when I said I couldn't _think_ of marrying for
_three or four years_; but seeing Albert has changed all this.

Pray, dearest Uncle, forward these two letters to Uncle Ernest
(to whom I beg you will enjoin _strict_ secrecy, and explain these
details, which I have not time to do) and to faithful Stockmar.

I think you might tell Louise of it, but none of her family. I should
wish to keep the dear young gentlemen here till the end of next month.
Ernest's sincere pleasure gave me great delight. He does so adore
dearest Albert. Ever, dearest Uncle, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _16th October 1839._

Lord Melbourne will be ready to wait upon your Majesty at a little
before one.

Lord Melbourne reads with great satisfaction your Majesty's expression
of feeling, as your Majesty's happiness must ever be one of Lord
Melbourne's first objects and strongest interests.




[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD'S SATISFACTION]

[Pageheading: AUSTRIA AND THE PORTE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

WIESBADEN, _24th October 1839._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--Nothing could have given me greater pleasure
than your dear letter. I had, when I saw your decision, almost the
feeling of old Zacharias[61]--"Now lettest Thou Thy servant depart
in peace"! Your choice had been for these last years my conviction of
what might and would be _best_ for your happiness; and just because I
was convinced of it, and knowing how _strangely_ fate often _deranges_
what one tries to bring about as being the best plan one could fix
upon, _the maximum of a good arrangement_, I feared that it would
_not_ happen. In your position, which may and will, perhaps, become
in future even more difficult in a political point of view, _you could
not exist_ without having a _happy_ and an _agreeable intérieur_.

And I am much deceived--which I think I am not--or you will find
in Albert just the very qualities and dispositions which are
indispensable for your happiness, and _which will suit your own
character, temper, and mode of life_. You say most amiably that you
consider it a sacrifice on the part of Albert. This is true in many
points, because his position will be a difficult one; but much, I may
say _all_, will depend on your affection for him. If _you love him,
and are kind to him_, he will easily bear the burthen of the position;
and there is a steadiness and at the same time cheerfulness in his
character which will facilitate this. I think your plans excellent.
If Parliament had been called at an unusual time it would make them
uncomfortable, and if, therefore, they receive the communication at
the opening of the Session, it will be best. The marriage, as you say,
might then follow as closely as possible.

Lord Melbourne has shown himself the _amiable_ and _excellent_ man I
always took him for. Another man in his position, instead of _your_
happiness, might have merely looked to his own personal views and
imaginary interests. Not so our good friend; he saw what was best _for
you_, and I feel it deeply to his praise.

Your keeping the cousins next month with you strikes me as a very good
plan. It will even show that you had sufficient opportunity of judging
of Albert's character....

On the 22nd, Prince Metternich came to see me. He was very kind, and
talked most confidentially about political affairs, particularly the
Oriental concerns.[62] M. de Brunnow had been with him. The short of
his views is this: he wishes that the Powers could be _unanimous_,
as he sees in this the best chance of avoiding measures of violence
against the Pasha of Egypt, which he considers _dangerous_, either as
_not_ sufficiently effective, or of a nature to bring on complications
most earnestly to be avoided, such as making use of Russian troops.
Austria naturally would like to bring about the best possible
arrangement for the Porte, but it will adhere to any arrangement or
proposition which can be agreed upon by England and France. He is,
however, positive that Candia must be given back to the Porte, its
position being too threatening, and therefore constantly alarming the
Porte. He made me write the import of our conversation to King Louis
Philippe, which I did send after him to Frankfort, where he was to
forward it to Paris. Perhaps you will have the goodness to communicate
this political scrap to good Lord Melbourne with my best regards. He
spoke in praise of Lord Beauvale.[63] The Prince is better, but grown
very old and looking tired. It gave me great pleasure to see him
again.

I drink the waters now four days, and can therefore not yet judge of
their good or bad effects. My palpitations are rather increased here;
if my stupid heart will get diseased I shall soon be departing for
some other world. I would it could be soon then.

Till further orders I shall say nothing to your Mother, Charles, or
Feodore.

Now I will conclude with my best blessings, and remain, my dearest and
most beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 61: An obvious slip for Simeon.]

    [Footnote 62: _See_ Introductory Notes for 1839 and 1840.
      (to Ch. VIII and Ch. IX)]

    [Footnote 63: Frederick Lamb, younger brother of Lord
    Melbourne, Ambassador Extraordinary at Vienna, who had
    recently been made a Peer.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S HAPPINESS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _29th October 1839._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Your most kind and most welcome letter of the 24th
arrived yesterday, and gave me very, very great pleasure. I was sure
you would be satisfied and pleased with our proceedings.

Before I proceed further, I wish just to mention one or two
alterations in the plan of announcing the event.

As Parliament has _nothing_ whatever to say respecting the marriage,
can neither approve nor disapprove it (I mean in a manner which might
_affect_ it), it is now proposed that, as soon as the cousins are gone
(which they now intend to do on the 12th or 14th of November, as time
presses), I should assemble all the Privy Councillors and announce to
them my intention....

Oh! dear Uncle, I _do_ feel so happy! I do so adore Albert! he is
quite an angel, and so very, very kind to me, and seems so fond of me,
which touches me much. I trust and hope I shall be able to make him
as happy as he _ought_ to be! I cannot bear to part from him, for we
spend such happy, delightful hours together.

Poor Ernest has been suffering since Wednesday last with the jaundice,
which is very distressing and troublesome, though not alarming.... I
love him dearly too, and look upon him quite as a brother.

What you say about Lord Melbourne has given me great pleasure; it is
very just and very true. There are not many _such_ honest kind friends
to be found in this world. He desires me to say that he is deeply
sensible of your good opinion, and that he can have no other object
than that which he considers best to secure my happiness, which is
closely connected with the well-being of the country.

I am glad you saw Prince Metternich, and that you were satisfied with
the interview.

I hope and trust you may derive much benefit from your stay at
Wiesbaden. Pray name me to good Stockmar, and believe me, always, your
most devoted Niece and Child,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: CONGRATULATIONS]


_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _9th November 1839._

MY MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--Your Uncle has already told you, I trust,
with what feelings of deep affection and gratitude I received the so
_interesting_ and _important_ communication which you permitted him
to make to me; but I was longing for an opportunity to speak to you
myself of the great subject which fills now our hearts, and to tell
you how very grateful I have been, I am, and will ever be, for the
confidence and trust which you so kindly placed in me. All I can
say is that you did full justice to my feelings, for _nothing_ could
interest _more_ my heart than _your_ marriage, my most dearly loved
Victoria, and I could not have heard even of that of Clémentine with
_more_ anxious affection and sisterly love. I cannot really tell you
_with words_ how deeply and strongly I was moved and affected by the
great news itself, and by your dear, unaffected, confiding, happy
letter. When I received it I could do nothing but cry, and say
internally, "May God bless her now and ever!" Ah! may God bless you,
my most beloved Victoria! may He shower on you His best blessings,
fulfil _all_ your heart's wishes and hopes, and let you enjoy for
_many, many years_ the happiness which the dearest ties of affection
_alone_ can give, and which is the only _real_ one, the only worthy of
the name in this uncertain and transitory world!

I have seen much of dear Albert two years ago, I have watched him, as
you may well think, with particular care, attention, and interest, and
although he was very young then, I am well convinced that he is not
only fit for the situation which he is now called to fulfil, but, what
is still more important in my eyes, that he has _all those qualities_
of the heart and the mind which can give and ensure happiness. I think
even that his disposition is particularly well calculated to suit
yours, and I am fully confident that you will be both happy together.
What you tell me of your fear of not being worthy of him, and able to
make him sufficiently happy, is for me but a proof more of it. Deep
affection makes us always diffident and _very humble_. Those that we
love stand so high in our own esteem, and are in our opinion so much
above us and all others that we naturally feel unworthy of them and
unequal to the task of making them happy: but there is, I think, a
mingled charm in this feeling, for although we regret not to be
what we should wish to be for them, feeling and acknowledging the
superiority of those we love and must always love and respect, is a
great satisfaction, and an increasing and everlasting one. You will
feel it, I am sure, as well as I do....

You will excuse my blots and hurried scribbling when I will tell you
that in order to profit of the private messenger which goes to-morrow
morning I write to you at ten in the evening, a thing quite unusual
for me, and even rather forbidden: but after having been deprived of
expending my heart for so many days, I could not _not_ avail myself of
the present opportunity. When I write to you by the ordinary messenger
I will continue to be _silent_; but I trust you will permit me to
say some time a word, when a safe opportunity presents itself, for my
heart is with you more than I can tell. I would that I could see you,
when it could be, for an hour. I remain, my most beloved Victoria,
ever and ever your most affectionate

LOUISE.




[Pageheading: THE ANNOUNCEMENT]


_Queen Victoria to the Duke of Sussex._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _11th November 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--The affection which you have shown me makes me feel
certain that you will take interest in an event which so nearly
concerns the future happiness of my life; I cannot, therefore, delay
any longer to inform you of my intended marriage with my Cousin
Albert, the merits of whose character are so well known by all who
are acquainted with him, that I need say no more than that I feel as
assured of my own happiness as I can be of anything in this world.

As it is not to be publicly known, I beg you not to mention it except
to our own Family.

I hope you are well and enjoying yourself. Believe me, always, your
affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.[64]

    [Footnote 64: Similar letters with slight variations were
    written to the Duke of Cambridge, the Princess Augusta, the
    Princess Sophia, the Duchess of Gloucester, the Princess
    Sophia Matilda, the King of Hanover, and the Princess
    Elizabeth (Landgravine of Hesse-Homburg).]




_Queen Victoria to Queen Adelaide._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _14th November 1839._

MY DEAR AUNT,--Your constant kindness and the affection you have ever
shown me make me certain that you will take much interest in an event
which so nearly concerns the future happiness of my life; I cannot,
therefore, any longer delay to inform you of my intended marriage with
my Cousin Albert. The merits of his character are so well known to all
who are acquainted with him, that I need say no more than that I feel
as assured of my own happiness as I can be of anything here below, and
only hope that I may be able to make him as happy as he deserves to
be. It was both my duty and my inclination to tell you of this as
soon as it was determined upon; but, as it is not to be yet publicly
announced I beg you not to mention it except to our own Family. I
thank you much for your kind letter, and rejoice to hear you have
enjoyed yourself so much. Believe me, always, your very affectionate
Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _18th November 1839._

The Queen just writes two lines to send Lord Melbourne the
accompanying civil letter from the Queen Dowager, and to give him an
account of the visit of the Cambridges. They were all very kind and
civil, George grown but not embellished, and much less reserved with
the Queen, and evidently happy to be _clear_ of me. He gave a very
indifferent account of the King of Greece, but a favourable one of the
Queen.

The Duchess said she had expected the Queen would marry Albert, and
was not surprised at the event. They were very discreet and asked no
questions, but described the Duchess of Gloucester to be _suffering_
much from the necessity of keeping the secret.

The weather cleared up, and the Queen has just returned from a walk.
She hopes Lord Melbourne got safe to London in spite of the wet
and the water on the road; and she hopes he will take great care of
himself. She would be thankful if he would let her know to-morrow if
he will dine with her also on Thursday or not.




[Pageheading: LETTERS TO PRINCE ALBERT]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _19th November 1839_.

MY DEAR UNCLE,--Many thanks for your kind letter of the 5th, received
last week. I am in a great hurry, and therefore have only time to
write to you a line to tell you, first, that on the 15th I wrote
to all the Royal Family announcing the event to them, and that they
answered all very kindly and civilly; the Duchess of Cambridge
and Augusta, with the Duke and George, came over on purpose to
congratulate me yesterday; secondly, that the marriage is to be
_publicly announced_ in an Open Council on the 23rd, at Buckingham
Palace, where I am going to-morrow. I return here _after_ the Council
on the 23rd. I am so happy to think I need not then conceal my
feelings any longer. I have also written to the King of Hanover and
the Landgravine,[65] and to all our relations abroad. I hope, dear
Uncle, you will not have _ill-treated_ my dearest Albert! I am very
anxious to hear from him from Wiesbaden. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 65: Princess Elizabeth (1770-1840), daughter of
    George III. and widow of the Landgrave Frederick Joseph Louis
    of Hesse-Homburg.]


[The following extracts of letters from the Queen to Prince Albert
were written partly in English and partly in German. The English
portions are printed in italics, the German, translated, in ordinary
type. These letters are all written in terms of profound affection,
which deepened very shortly into complete and absolute devotion to the
Prince.]




_Queen Victoria to Prince Albert._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _21st November 1839._

... It is desired here that the matter should be declared at Coburg
as soon as possible, and immediately after that I shall send you the
Order.[66]

_Your rank will be settled just before you come over, as also your_
_rank in the Army._ Everything will be very easily arranged. Lord
Melbourne showed me yesterday the _Declaration_, which is very simple
and nice. I will send it you as soon as possible....

_Lord Melbourne told me yesterday, that the whole Cabinet are strongly
of opinion that you should NOT be made a Peer._ I will write that to
Uncle....

    [Footnote 66: The Garter.]




[Pageheading: THE RELIGIOUS QUESTION]


_22nd November 1839._

... Lord Melbourne has just been with me, and greatly wishes the
Declaration to be made at Coburg as soon as possible. _He also desired
me to ask you to see if you can ... a short History of the House of
Saxe-Coburg, who our direct ancestors were, and what part they took in
the Protestant, or rather Lutheran, religion; he wishes to hear this
in order to make people here know exactly who your ancestors are, for
a few stupid people_ here _try_ to say you are a _Catholic, but nobody
will believe it._ Send (it) as soon as possible; perhaps good Mr.
Schenk would write it out in English....

_As there is nothing to be settled for me, we require no treaty of
marriage; but if you should require anything to be settled, the best
will be to send it here. Respecting the succession, in case Ernest
should die without children, it would not do to stipulate now, but
your second son, if you had one, should reside at Coburg. That can
easily be arranged if the thing should happen hereafter, and the
English would not like it to be arranged now...._




[Pageheading: THE DECLARATION]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _23rd November 1839._

... Just arrived here, 5.30. Everything has gone off very well. The
Council[67] was held at two o'clock; more than a hundred persons were
present, and _there_ I had to read the Declaration. _It was rather an
awful moment, to be obliged to announce this to so many people, many
of whom were quite strangers, but they told me I did it very well, and
I felt so happy to do it._

Good Lord Melbourne was deeply moved about it, and Uxbridge likewise;
it lasted only two or three minutes. _Everybody, they tell me, is very
much pleased, and I wish you could have seen the crowds of people who
cheered me loudly as I left the Palace for Windsor._ I am so happy
to-day! oh, if only _you_ could be here! I wish that you were able
to participate in all the kindness which is shown to me. To-day I can
only send you the Declaration.[68] _The description of the whole_ I
will send after this....

Send me as soon as possible the report of the announcement at Coburg.
I wear your dear picture mornings and evenings, and wore it also at
the meeting of the _Conseil._

    [Footnote 67: A Special Meeting of the Privy Council was held
    on the 23rd November, to receive the Queen's intimation of her
    engagement. The Queen wrote in her Journal:--

    "I went in; the room was full, but I hardly knew who was
    there. Lord M. I saw, looking at me with tears in his eyes,
    but he was not near me. I then read my short Declaration. I
    felt my hands shook, but I did not make one mistake. I felt
    more happy and thankful when it was over."]

    [Footnote 68: J. W. Croker wrote to Lady Hardwicke:--

    "_24th November 1839._

    "... She then unfolded a paper and read her Declaration,
    which you will, before this can reach you, have seen in the
    newspapers. I cannot describe to you with what a mixture of
    self-possession and feminine delicacy she read the paper. Her
    voice, which is naturally beautiful, was clear and untroubled;
    and her eye was bright and calm, neither bold nor downcast,
    but firm and soft. There was a blush on her cheek which made
    her look both handsomer and more interesting; and certainly
    she _did_ look as interesting and as handsome as any young
    lady I ever saw.

    "I happened to stand behind the Duke of Wellington's chair,
    and caught her eye twice as she directed it towards him, which
    I fancy she did with a good-natured interest. ...The crowd,
    which was not great but very decent, I might almost say
    respectable, expressed their approbation of the Duke of
    Wellington and Sir R. Peel, and their disapprobation of the
    Ministers very loudly. Lord John and Lord Normanby, they tell
    me, were positively hooted.... Lord Melbourne ... seemed to me
    to look _careworn_, and on the whole the meeting had a sombre
    air."--_Croker Papers_, ii. 359.]




[Pageheading: THE PEERAGE QUESTION]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

WIESBADEN, _22nd November 1839._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I was delighted with your dear little letter.
You write these kind of letters with a very great facility, and they
are generally so natural and clever, that it makes one very happy
to receive them. I had written less of late, because I thought you
occupied more agreeably than to read my letters. I have on purpose
kept back a courier, to be able to send you the latest news from here
of M. Albert. The young people arrived here only on the 20th, in the
morning, having very kindly stopped at Bonn. I find them looking well,
particularly Albert; it proves that happiness is an excellent remedy,
and keeps people in better health than any other. He is much attached
to you, and moved when he speaks of you. He is, besides, in great
spirits and gaiety, and full of fun; he is a very amiable companion.

Concerning the peerage, that is a matter to be considered at any
time; the only reason why I do wish it is, that Albert's foreignership
should disappear as much as possible. I have, in different
circumstances to be sure, suffered greatly from my having declined
conditionally the peerage when it was offered me in 1816.[69] Your
Uncle[70] writes to you in German: as far as I understood him, he
speaks of the necessity of a marriage treaty; that is a matter of
course. There is, however, something additional to be regulated
concerning the possible succession in the Coburg-Gotha dominions,
there being betwixt it and Albert but good Ernest. Some regulation
becomes therefore necessary, at least reasonable. The Duke wishes also
to know if the treaty is to be made in England or in Germany.
Should the last of the two be fixed upon, he thinks that one of your
Ministers abroad would be the proper person for it. Ever, my dear
Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 69: The Dukedom of Kendal was offered to, and, after
    consideration, declined by, Prince Leopold.]

    [Footnote 70: The Duke of Saxe-Coburg (Ernest I.).]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th November 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I thank you for your kind letter which I received
the day before yesterday; but I fear you must have been very dull at
Wiesbaden....

Everything went off uncommonly well on the 23rd, but it was rather
formidable;[71] eighty-two Privy Councillors present; everybody very
much pleased--and I was loudly greeted on leaving the Palace _after_
the Council.

The _whole Cabinet_ agree with me in being _strongly_ of opinion that
Albert should _not_ be a Peer; indeed, I see everything against it and
_nothing_ for it; the English are very jealous at the idea of Albert's
having any political power, or meddling with affairs here--which I
know from himself he will _not_ do.

As Wiesbaden is half-way (or thereabouts) to Coburg, I take the
liberty of enclosing a large letter to Albert, which I beg you to send
on to him.

We are quite flooded here, and the road to Datchet is quite
impassable. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 71: Greville mentions that the Queen's hands
    trembled so, that she could hardly read the Declaration which
    she was holding.]




[Pageheading: BRITISH SUSCEPTIBILITIES]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_27th November 1839._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty....

A little civility would be well bestowed upon Lord and Lady
Tankerville, and might not be without its effect, but if your Majesty
does not like it, it cannot be helped.

The others also shall, if possible, be kept in good humour.

The misrepresentation, respecting Prince Alexander[72] your Majesty
will see corrected in the _Morning Chronicle_ of that morning, but of
course your Majesty will not expect that this contradiction will put
an end to bitter and offensive remarks. It will now be said that,
knowing the true religion, he has given over his children to the
false, and that he has sacrificed their eternal welfare to his own
worldly objects.[73] There is nothing which cannot be turned in an
hostile and malignant manner by malignant and perverted ingenuity.

Can your Majesty inform Lord Melbourne what is the arrangement
respecting King Leopold's children? They are, Lord Melbourne presumes,
to be brought up Roman Catholics.

Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes to hear that your Majesty is better and
more free from pain. He is himself very well.

    [Footnote 72: Prince Alexander of Würtemberg.]

    [Footnote 73: See _ante_, p. 150. (Ch. VIII, Footnote 22)]




_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _27th November 1839._

_The English are very jealous of any foreigner interfering in the
government of this country, and have already in some of the papers
(which are friendly to me and you) expressed a hope that you would not
interfere. Now, though I know you never would, still, if you were a
Peer, they would all say, the Prince meant to play a political part._
I am certain you will understand this, but it is much better not to
say anything more about it now, and to let the whole matter rest.
The Tories make a great disturbance (saying) that you are _a Papist_,
because the words "_a Protestant Prince_" have not been put into the
Declaration--a thing which would be quite unnecessary, seeing that I
_cannot_ marry a _Papist_....




_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

_29th November 1839._

I had a talk with Lord Melbourne last night. He thinks your view about
the Peerage question quite correct. Uncle seems to me, after all, much
more reasonable about it. We had a good talk this morning about
your arrangements for our marriage, and also about your official
attendants, and he[74] has told me that young Mr. Anson (his Private
Secretary), who is with him, greatly wishes to be with you. I am very
much in favour of it, because he is an excellent young man, and very
modest, very honest, very steady, very well-informed, and will be of
_much use_ to you. He is not a member of the House of Commons, which
is also convenient; so long as Lord Melbourne is in office he remains
his Secretary--but William Cowper[75] was also for some time Secretary
to his Uncle, and at the same time my Groom-in-Waiting. Lord Melbourne
feared it was not advisable for you to have Mr. Anson, and also his
uncle, but I told him that did not matter if the people are fit for
the posts....

    [Footnote 74: Lord Melbourne.]

    [Footnote 75: Afterwards William Cowper-Temple and Lord Mount
    Temple, author of the well-known amendment to the Education
    Act of 1870.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN OF PORTUGAL]


_Queen Maria II. of Portugal to Queen Victoria._

LISBONNE, _1 Décembre 1839._

MA BIEN CHÈRE VICTOIRE,--Hier ayant reçu la communication de votre
mariage avec Albert, je ne veux pas tarder un seul instant à vous
en féliciter sur votre heureux choix, et en même temps vous prier de
croire aux v[oe]ux sincères que je forme pour votre bonheur avec votre
excellent c[oe]ur il n'est pas possible le contraire. Permettez que je
vous dise que votre choix ne m'a pas dû étonner, car sachant combien
Albert est bon, vous ne pouviez pas choisir un autre dont vous fussiez
aussi sûre qu'il puisse vous rendre aussi heureuse comme vous le
méritez, chère Victoire. Pour que tous mes souhaits soient exaucés je
vous désire un bonheur aussi complet que l'est le mien. Qu'Albert soit
comme Ferdinand et vous serez parfaitement heureuse. Adieu! ma chère
Victoire. Je vous prie de me croire, votre dévouée Cousine,

MARIE.

Ferdinand vous fait dire mille choses.




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE'S HOUSEHOLD]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _8th December 1839._

As to your wish about your gentlemen, my dear Albert, I must tell you
quite honestly that it will not do. You may entirely rely upon me that
the people who will be about you will be absolutely pleasant people,
of high standing and good character. _These gentlemen will not be in
continual attendance on you; only on great occasions, and to accompany
you when you go anywhere, and to dinners, etc. Seymour is your
confidential attendant, and also Schenk and Anson,[76] whom Lehzen
has written to you about._

_Old Sir George Anson has been told of your gracious wish to have him
as Groom of the Bedchamber and is delighted._

_I_ can only have _Lords_, and they will not be _Peers_, but _Lords_,
the eldest sons of Dukes or Marquesses, or Earls (Counts), and who as
far as possible are not in Parliament, for then they need not change,
_but your people are appointed by you and not by me (nominally), and
therefore, unless they were to vote against my Government (which would
be awkward), they need not change. You may rely upon my care that you
shall have proper people, and not idle and not too young, and Lord
Melbourne has already mentioned several to me who would be very
suitable...._

I have received to-day an ungracious letter from Uncle Leopold. He
appears to me to be nettled because I no longer ask for his advice,
but dear Uncle is given to believe that he must rule the roast
everywhere. However, that is not a necessity. As he has written to
Melbourne, Melbourne will reply to him on every point, and will also
tell him that Stockmar ought to come here as soon as possible to
arrange everything about the treaty. That will be a very good thing,
because Stockmar understands all English things so well.

The _Second_, as you always called Palmerston, is to be married within
the next few days to Lady Cowper, the sister of my Premier (_Primus_);
I have known this for a long time, but Melbourne asked me not to tell
it to any one. They are, both of them, above fifty, and I think that
they are quite right so to act, because Palmerston, since the death
of his sisters, is quite alone in the world, and _Lady C._ is a very
clever woman, and _much_ attached to him; still, I feel sure it will
make you smile.

    [Footnote 76: Mr George Anson had been Private Secretary to
    Lord Melbourne; it was on Lord Melbourne's recommendation that
    the Queen appointed him Private Secretary to Prince Albert.
    The Prince was inclined to resent the selection, and to think
    that in the case of so confidential an official he should have
    been allowed to make his own nomination. But they became firm
    friends, and the Prince found Mr Anson's capacity, common
    sense, and entire disinterestedness of the greatest value to
    him. Later he became keeper of the Prince's Privy Purse, and
    died in 1849.]


(_Continued on the 9th_).--To-day I have had a _Conseil_, and then I
knighted the Mayor of Newport[77] (who distinguished himself so much
in that _riot of the Chartists_[78]); he is a very timid, modest man,
and was very happy when I told him orally how exceedingly satisfied I
am with his conduct.... The officers have been rewarded too.... I am
plaguing you already with tiresome politics, but you will in that find
a proof of my [confidence] love,[79] because I must share with you
everything that rejoices me, everything that vexes or grieves me, and
I am certain you will take your part in it....

To-day I saw Lord William Russell--you know him, don't you? I forgot
to tell you that you will have a _great Officer of State_ at the head
of your Household, who is called the _Groom of the Stole_; it is a
position in the Court for prestige only, without any business; he will
be a _Peer_....

    [Footnote 77: Mr T. Phillips, the Mayor of Newport,
    Monmouthshire, had behaved with great coolness and courage
    during the riot on 4th November. He read the Riot Act among
    showers of bullets before ordering the troops to fire.]

    [Footnote 78: Frost, Williams, and others, afterwards
    convicted at Monmouth.]

    [Footnote 79: The Queen had begun the word "confidence" but
    struck it out and substituted "love."]


(_Continued 10th December_).--I am very impatient at your bust not
having yet arrived; the Duchess of Sutherland wrote to me she had seen
it in Rome, and it was so beautiful!...

Who has made the little copy which you sent me, and who the original?
Feodore writes to me so much about you....

We expect Queen Adelaide to-day, who will stay here until the day
after to-morrow. Melbourne has asked me to enquire of you whether
you know Lord Grosvenor? He is the eldest son of the Marquis
of Westminster, and does not belong to any party; he is not in
Parliament. He is very pleasant, speaks German very well, and has been
a good deal on the Continent. If he accepts, he might be one of
your _gentlemen_. _Lord Melbourne is particularly desirous of doing
everything that is most agreeable to you._ I have a request to make,
too, viz., that you will appoint poor Clark your _physician_; you need
not consult him unless you wish it. It is only an honorary title, and
would make him very happy....




[Pageheading: THE PROTESTANT QUESTION]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _9th December 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--... I was quite miserable at not hearing from Albert
for _ten_ days; such a long silence is quite insupportable for any
one in my position towards Albert, and I was overjoyed on receiving
yesterday the _most_ dear, _most_ affectionate, delightful long letter
from him. He writes so beautifully, and so simply and unaffectedly.
I hope, dear Uncle, you received my last letter (quite a packet) for
Albert, on the 5th or 6th? I send you another now. I fear I am very
indiscreet about these letters, but I have so much to tell him, and
it will only last two months, so that I trust you will forgive it, and
forward them.

I mentioned the topics you spoke of to me in your letter to our good
friend Lord Melbourne, and as he is writing, I leave it to him to
explain to you, as he writes so much better than I do. He will explain
to you _why_ the word Protestant was left out in the Declaration,
which I think was quite right; for do what one will, nothing will
please these Tories.... I shall be delighted to see Stockmar here, for
so many reasons, and the quicker he comes the better....

I have a favour to ask you, dear Uncle, which I hope you will grant,
unless it should be _indiscreet_ in me. It is, if you have still got
Aunt Charlotte's bust at Claremont, if you would give it to me to put
in the Gallery here, where you would see it _oftener_ than you do at
Claremont, and I am so anxious there should be one of her _here_.

We have _vile_ weather, cold and foggy; such fogs we have here! I move
to London for good on the 9th or 10th of January. Ever your devoted
Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _11th December 1839._

... I like Lady A---- very much too, only she is a little _strict and
particular_, and too severe towards others, which is not right; for
I think one ought always to be indulgent towards other people, _as I
always think, if we had not been well brought up and well taken care
of, we might also have gone astray_. That is always my feeling. Yet
it is always right to show that one does not like to see what is
obviously wrong; but it is very dangerous to be _too_ severe, and I am
certain that as a rule such people always greatly regret that in their
youth they have not been as careful as they ought to have been. I have
explained this so badly, and written it so badly, that I fear you will
hardly be able to make it out.




_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _15th December 1839._

... Again no letter from you!... Lord Melbourne left here this
morning, but comes back to-morrow evening, after the wedding of his
sister. I hope he will remain here, because I am fond of him, and
because he has a share in all my happiness, and is the only man with
whom I can speak without _gêne_ on everything, which I cannot do with
my Court.

"Islay"[80] is still plagued by him every evening--a thing which he
much enjoys--and constantly begs for the spectacles. I forgot to tell
you that Karl has given me a pretty little Rowley, who likewise lives
in the house. The multitude of dogs is really terrible!

The ceremony of Declaration must have been very fine and touching, and
I am most happy that the good people of Coburg are so pleased with our
marriage....

    [Footnote 80: A pet dog of the Queen's.]


_Dec. 17th._--I have spoken to Lord M. about your wish, and he
says--what is my own opinion too--_that your people ought to be as
much as possible out of Parliament when they have hardly any politics,
which is the best thing--as your Household must not form a contrast
to mine--and therefore you could not have violent Tories amongst your
people; but you may be quite certain that both I and Lord Melbourne
will take the greatest care to select respectable and distinguished
people, and people of good character. Perhaps Lord Grosvenor may be
your Groom of the Stole, though he is no Peer; but his rank and family
are so high, that he would do very well; and, besides, not belonging
to any party, and being out of Parliament, is such a great advantage._

The design of our Arms without _supporters_ is unfortunately not
finished, but I send you a little drawing which I have made of it
myself. The report of Sir William Woods I beg you will send back, but
the Arms you can keep.

I add a little pin as a small Christmas present. I hope you will
sometimes wear it.




[Pageheading: THE PROTESTANT QUESTION]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _14th December 1839._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I lived in the hope of receiving some letters
for you from Albert, but nothing is arrived to-day. Your dear long
letter gave me great pleasure. Before I answer some parts of it, I
will say a few words on Lord Melbourne's letter. Perhaps you will be
so good to tell him that it gratified me much. It is the letter of an
honest and an amiable statesman, practical and straightforward. In
the omission of the word "Protestant" he was probably right, and it is
equally probable that they would have abused him--maybe even more if
he had put it in. There is only this to say, however: the Ernestine
branch of the Saxon family has been, there is no doubt, the real cause
of the establishment of Protestantism in Germany, and consequently in
great parts of Northern Europe. This same line became a martyr to that
cause, and was deprived of almost all its possessions in consequence
of it.

Recently there have been two cases of Catholic marriages, but the main
branch has remained, and is, in fact, very sincerely Protestant. Both
Ernest and Albert are much attached to it, and when deviations took
place they were connected more with new branches transplanted out of
the parent soil than with what more properly must be considered as the
reigning family.

The Peerage question may remain as it is, but it will not be denied
that the great object must be to make Albert as English as possible,
and that nothing will render this more difficult than a foreign
name....

I shall be most happy to see poor Charlotte's bust in the Gallery at
Windsor, and it is kind of you to have had the thought. She was a high
and noble-minded creature, and her affection and kindness for me
very great. She had placed the most unbounded confidence in me; our
principle had been never to let a single day pass over any little
subject of irritation. The only subjects of that sort we had were
about the family, particularly the Regent, and then the old Queen
Charlotte. Now I must conclude with my best love. Ever, my dearest
Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: A MISSING LETTER]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _17th December 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--Many thanks for your two most kind letters. I
suppose I _may_ send for Aunt Charlotte's bust, for which I am most
grateful--and say I have your authority to do so? You are very kind to
think about my stupid health; I don't think I _ever_, at least not
for _very_ long, have _walked_ so regularly as I have done this last
month--out in fog, and mist, and wind, and cold. But I cannot be
otherwise than agitated; getting _no_ letter makes me ill, and
_getting_ them excites me....

I have much to write, and therefore cannot make this a long letter,
but _one_ thing more I must mention. The very day of the Declaration
in Council, on the 23rd ult., I sent off a letter to Albert, by Van
de Weyer, saying it was to be forwarded _sans délai_ to Coburg; now,
Albert _never_ has received that letter, which was a long one, and
thanks me for two, of the 26th and 29th. This vexes me much, and
I can't help thinking the letter is lying either at Wiesbaden or
Brussels. Would you graciously enquire, for I should not like it to be
lost.

Forgive my writing such a letter so full of _myself_. Ever, dearest
Uncle, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE'S SECRETARY]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE.

_The 22nd._--I have but little time to write. The Duchess of
Sutherland is here, who admires you much, and is very sympathetic....

_The 23rd._--Your letter of the 15th just received. I will now answer
at once. _It is, as you rightly suppose, my greatest, my most anxious
wish to do everything most agreeable to you, but I must differ with
you respecting Mr Anson.... What I said about Anson giving you advice,
means, that if you like to ask him, he can and will be of the greatest
use to you, as he is a very well-informed person. He will leave Lord
Melbourne as soon as he is appointed about you. With regard to your
last objection, that it would make you a party man if you took the
Secretary of the Prime Minister as your Treasurer, I do not agree in
it; for, though I am very anxious you should not appear to belong to a
Party, still it is necessary that your Household should not form a too
strong contrast to mine, else they will say, "Oh, we know the Prince
says he belongs to no party, but we are sure he is a Tory!" Therefore
it is also necessary that it should appear that you went with me in
having some of your people who are staunch Whigs; but Anson is not
in Parliament, and never was, and therefore he is not a violent
politician. Do not think because I urge this, Lord M. prefers it; on
the contrary, he never urged it, and I only do it as I know it is for
your own good._ You will pardon this long story. _It will also not do
to wait till you come to appoint all your people. I am distressed
to tell you what I fear you do not like_, but it is necessary, my
dearest, most excellent Albert. Once more I tell you that you can
perfectly rely on me in these matters....




[Pageheading: THE TORIES]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th December 1839._

... The Historical Sketch has interested us greatly; Lord Melbourne
read it through immediately. I greatly thank you also for the
genealogical tree you sent me.

Now, my dearest, to be about what is _not so pleasant or amusing.
I mean, now for business. I always think it safer to write that in
English, as I can explain myself better, and I hope you can read my
English, as I try to be very legible. I am much grieved that you feel
disappointed about my wish respecting your gentlemen, but very glad
that you consent to it, and that you feel confidence in my choice.
Respecting the Treasurer, my dearest Albert, I have already written
at great length in my last letter, so I will not say much more about
it to-day, but I will just observe that, tho' I fully understand
(indeed no one could feel more for you in the very trying position you
will be placed in than I do) your feelings, it is absolutely necessary
that an Englishman should be at the head of your affairs; therefore
(tho' I will not force Mr. Anson on you) I ask you if it is not better
to take a man in whom I have confidence, and whom I know well enough
to trust perfectly, than a man who is quite a stranger, and whom I
know nothing of?_

I am very glad that your father knows Lord Grosvenor. As to the
Tories, I am still in a rage;[81] they abuse and grumble incessantly
in the most incredible manner.

I will tell good Lord Melbourne that you are very grateful. That you
will write to him is very nice of you, and makes me glad. I shall
always feel very happy if you, my dearest Albert, will be very
friendly to this good and just man; and I am convinced that, when you
will know him more intimately, you will be as fond of him as I am.
No one is more abused by bad people than Lord M.--_and nobody is so
forgiving_....

I have just learned that my two uncles, the Dukes of Sussex and
Cambridge (_to whom Lord M. had written_) _very willingly consent to
let you take precedence of them; it was, of course, necessary to ask
them about it...._

    [Footnote 81: _Lit._ raging (_wuthend_). The phrase was a
    favourite one of King Leopold's, from whom the Queen had
    adopted it.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _27th December 1839._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--Just two words (though you don't deserve _half a one_,
as your silence is unpardonable) to say I have just heard from Albert,
who, I am glad to say, consents to _my_ choosing his people; so _one
essential_ point is gained, and we have only the Treasurer to carry
now. I am sure, as you are so anxious Albert should be thoroughly
English, you will see how necessary it is that an Englishman should be
at the head of his financial affairs.

I see that you wrote to Lord Melbourne that you were glad to hear I
took more walking exercise, but I must tell you that ever since I
have done so I sleep badly, and feel unwell! If the weather would only
allow me to ride I should be quite well. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE AND LORD MELBOURNE]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _30th December 1839._

... I here enclose Lord Melbourne's letter. I have read it, and _I
think that nothing could be better; it is just what I told you, and it
is the honest and impartial advice of a very clever, very honest,
and very impartial man, whose_ greatest wish is to secure your and
my happiness. Follow this advice and you may be sure of success. Lord
Melbourne told me that he had it written on purpose in a clear hand,
by one of his secretaries, as he thought and feared you would not be
able to read his own hand, which I daresay would have been the case,
as he writes a very peculiar hand; he has therefore only signed it.

I saw to-day the Duke of Cambridge, who has shown me your letter, with
which he is quite delighted--and, indeed, it is a very nice one. The
Duke told Lord Melbourne he had always greatly desired our marriage,
and never thought of George; but that _I_ do not believe.

I must conclude, my dearest, beloved Albert. Be careful as to your
valuable health, and be assured that no one loves you as much as your
faithful VICTORIA.




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER IX


The marriage of the Queen and Prince Albert took place amid great
splendour and general rejoicings on the 10th of February; the general
satisfaction being unaffected by the tactless conduct of Ministers
who, by not acting in conjunction with the Opposition, had been
defeated on the question of the amount of the Prince's annuity, the
House of Commons reducing it from £50,000 to £30,000.

At home, the Privilege Question aroused great interest, a point which
for months convulsed the Courts and Parliament being whether a report,
ordered by the House to be printed, of a Committee appointed by the
House, was protected by privilege against being the subject of an
action for libel. The Courts having decided that it was not, an
Act was passed to alter the rule for the future, but meanwhile the
sheriffs had been imprisoned by the House for executing the judgment
in the usual course.

The Ministry tottered on, getting a majority of nine only on their
China policy, and twenty-one on a direct vote of confidence. The
Bill for the union of the two Canadas was, however, passed without
difficulty.

An attempt by a barman named Oxford to assassinate the Queen on
Constitution Hill fortunately failed, and Oxford was committed, after
trial, to a lunatic asylum. In July, the prospect of an heir being
born to the throne led to the passing of a Regency Bill, naming Prince
Albert Regent, should the Queen die leaving issue; the Duke of Sussex
alone entered a formal protest against it.

Afghanistan continued unsettled, and Lord Auckland's policy seemed
hardly justified by the unpopularity at Cabul of Shah Sooja; Dost
Mahommed still made efforts to regain his position, but he ultimately
surrendered to Sir William Macnaghten, the British Envoy at Cabul.
The disputes with China continued, and hostilities broke out; British
ships proceeded to China, and Chusan was captured.

In France an attempt against the Government was made by Louis
Napoleon, who landed at Boulogne in a British steamer, was captured,
and sentenced to life imprisonment. More serious difficulties between
this country and France arose out of Eastern affairs. The Four Powers,
England, Russia, Austria, and Prussia, had addressed an ultimatum to
Mehemet, requiring him to evacuate North Syria, France declining to
take part in the conference on the subject. An Anglo-Austrian army
undertook to eject him, St Jean d'Acre was stormed, and France thrust
into a position of unwilling isolation. Thiers, who had been made
Minister, expected that Mehemet would be able to retain his conquests,
and for a time it looked as though France would interfere to protect
him. Ultimately, in spite of some ostentatious preparations in France,
peaceful counsels prevailed, and Thiers found it advisable to retire
in favour of Guizot.

In Holland, William I. (then sixty-seven) abdicated in favour of his
son, the Prince of Orange (William II.). The need of a younger
and firmer ruler was the reason officially stated in the Royal
Proclamation. The real reasons were probably the King's attachment
to the Roman Catholic Countess d'Oultremont, whom he now privately
married, and the humiliation he felt at the unfavourable termination
of the Belgian dispute.




CHAPTER IX

1840


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _11th January 1840._

STOCKMAR is here; I saw him yesterday and to-day, and have begged him
to explain to you _all the Court affairs, and the affairs concerning
the Treaty_, in my name. He will explain to you the Treasury affair,
and will do it much better than I should. I am very happy to see him
again, and to have him here; he can give such good advice to both of
us, and he understands England so fully.... Stocky (as I always
used to call him) is so sensible about everything, and is _so much_
attached to you.

I shall have no great dinners, because the large rooms in the upper
story here are not yet ready. My good old Primus[1] usually dines
with me three or four times a week, almost always on Sundays, _when I
cannot invite other people to dinner, as it is not reckoned right here
for me to give dinners on Sunday, or to invite many people_. Your song
(the bust has been mentioned before) is very fine; there is something
touching in it which I like so much....

    [Footnote 1: _I.e._ Premier.]




[Pageheading: OPENING OF PARLIAMENT]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _12th January 1840._

This letter will be handed you by Torrington personally. I recommend
you not to leave late, so as to make the journey without hurry. I did
not go to church to-day; the weather is very cold, and I have to be
careful not to catch cold before the 16th, because I open Parliament
in person. _This is always a nervous proceeding, and the announcement
of my marriage at the beginning of my speech is really a very nervous
and awful affair for me. I have never failed yet, and this is the
sixth time that I have done it, and yet I am just as frightened as if
I had never done it before. They say that feeling of nervousness
is never got over, and that Wm. Pitt himself never got up to make
a speech without thinking he should fail. But then I only read my
speech._

I had to-day a visit from George[2] whom I received _alone_, and he
was very courteous. His Papa I have also seen.

    [Footnote 2: Prince George of Cambridge.]




_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _17th January 1840._

... Yesterday just as I came home from the House of Lords,[3] I
received your dear letter of the 10th. I cannot understand at all why
you have received no letters from me, seeing that I always wrote twice
a week, regularly....

I observe with horror that I have not formally invited your father;
though that is a matter of course. My last letter will have set that
right. I ought not to have written to you on picture notepaper, seeing
that we are in deep mourning for my poor Aunt, the Landgravine,[4] but
it was quite impossible for me to write to you on mourning paper....

_But this will not interfere with our marriage in the least; the
mourning will be taken off for that day, and for two or three days
after, and then put on again._

Everything went off exceedingly well yesterday. There was an immense
multitude of people, and perhaps never, certainly not for a long
time, have I been received so well; and what is remarkable, I _was
not nervous_, and read the speech really well. The Tories began
immediately afterwards to conduct themselves very _badly_ and to
plague us. But everyone praised you very much. Melbourne made a very
fine speech about you and your ancestors. To-day I receive the
Address of the House of Lords, and, perhaps, also that of the House of
Commons.

    [Footnote 3: The Queen had opened Parliament in person, and
    announced her intended marriage.]

    [Footnote 4: The Princess Elizabeth (born 1770), third
    daughter of George III. and widow of the Landgrave Frederick
    Joseph Louis of Hesse-Homburg. _See_ p. 195. (Ch. VIII, Footnote 65)]




[Pageheading: TORIES, WHIGS, AND RADICALS]

_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _21st January 1840._

I am awaiting with immense impatience a letter from you. Here hardly
anything to relate to-day, because we are living in great retirement,
until informed that my poor Aunt has been buried. With the exception
of Melbourne and my own people, no one has dined for the last week.

We are all of us very much preoccupied with politics. The Tories
really are very astonishing; _as they cannot and dare not attack us in
Parliament, they do everything that they can to be personally rude to
me.... The Whigs are the only safe and loyal people, and the Radicals
will also rally round their Queen to protect her from the Tories;
but it is a curious sight to see those, who as Tories, used to pique
themselves upon their excessive loyalty, doing everything to degrade
their young Sovereign in the eyes of the people. Of course there are
exceptions._




_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _31st January 1840._

... You have written to me in one of your letters about our stay at
Windsor, but, dear Albert, you have not at all understood the matter.
_You forget, my dearest Love, that I am the Sovereign, and that
business can stop and wait for nothing. Parliament is sitting, and
something occurs almost every day, for which I may be required, and it
is quite impossible for me to be absent from London; therefore two
or three days is already a long time to be absent. I am never easy a
moment, if I am not on the spot, and see and hear what is going on,
and everybody, including all my Aunts (who are very knowing in all
these things), says I must come out after the second day, for, as I
must be surrounded by my Court, I cannot keep alone. This is also my
own wish in every way._

Now as to the Arms: _as an English Prince you have no right, and Uncle
Leopold had no right to quarter the English Arms, but the Sovereign
has the power to allow it by Royal Command: this was done for Uncle
Leopold by the Prince Regent, and I will do it again for you. But it
can only be done by Royal Command._

I will, therefore, without delay, have a seal engraved for you.

You will certainly feel very happy too, at the news of the coming
union of my much-beloved Vecto[5] with Nemours. It gives me quite
infinite pleasure, because then I can see the dear child more
frequently.

I read in the newspaper that you, dear Albert, have received many
Orders; also that the Queen of Spain will send you the Golden
Fleece....

Farewell, dearest Albert, and think often of thy faithful

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 5: The Princess Victoire of Saxe-Coburg, cousin of
    Queen Victoria.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE'S GRANT]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _31st January 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I am most grateful for your long letter of the
27th and 28th inst. I send a messenger to be able to answer quite
confidentially. I must confess that I never saw anything _so
disgraceful_ than the discussion and vote in the Commons.[6] The whole
mode and way in which those who opposed the grant treated the
question was so extremely _vulgar_ and _disrespectful_, that I cannot
comprehend the Tories. The men who uphold the dignity of the Crown to
treat their Sovereign in such a manner, on such an occasion! Even in
private life the most sour and saturnine people relax and grow gay
and mildly disposed on occasions like this. Clearly, as you are Queen
Regnant, Albert's position is to all intents and purposes that of a
male Queen Consort, and the same privileges and charges ought to be
attached to it which were attached to Queen Adelaide's position. The
giving up the income which the Queen-Dowager came into, and which I
hope and trust Albert would never have, or have had, any chance of
having had himself, was in reality giving up a thing which _custom_
had sanctioned. That Prince George of Denmark[7] was considered to
be in the same position as a Queen Consort there can be, I think,
no doubt about, and when one considers the immense difference in the
value of money then and now, it renders matters still more striking.
I must say such conduct in Parliament I did _not expect_, and the
less when I consider that your Civil List was rather curtailed than
otherwise, perhaps not quite fairly. I rejoice to think that I induced
Lord Melbourne to propose to you not to accede to the giving up of
the Duchy of Lancaster. Parliament did not deserve it, and by good
management I think something may be made of it.

Another thing which made me think that Parliament would have acted
with more decency, is that I return to the country now near £40,000
a year, _not because_ I thought my income _too large_, as worthy Sir
Robert Peel said, but from motives of political delicacy, which at
least might be acknowledged on such occasions. I was placed by my
marriage treaty in the position of a Princess of Wales, which in
reality it was, though not yet by law, there existing a possibility of
a Prince of Wales as long as George IV. lived. I can only conclude by
crying _shame, shame_!...

I hope and trust you will not be too much worried with all these
unpleasant things, and that Albert will prove a comforter and support
to you. And so good-bye for to-day. Ever, my dearest Victoria, your
devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 6: The Ministers proposed an income of £50,000 a
    year for the Prince--the Conservatives and Radicals united on
    an amendment reducing it to £30,000, which was carried by a
    majority of 104.]

    [Footnote 7: The Consort of Queen Anne.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE AT BRUSSELS]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _1st February 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I hope you will be pleased with me, as I send a
messenger on purpose to inform you of Albert's arrival. He will write
himself this night, though rather inclined to surrender himself to
Morpheus.

He looks well and handsome, but a little interesting, being very much
irritated by what happened in the House of Commons. He does not
care about the money, but he is much shocked and exasperated by the
disrespect of the thing, as he well may.

I do not yet know the exact day of their departure, but I suppose it
will be on the 5th, to be able to cross on the 6th. I have already
had some conversation with him, and mean to talk _à fond_ to him
to-morrow. My wish is to see you both happy and thoroughly united
and of one mind, and I trust that both of you will ever find in me a
faithful, honest, and attached friend.

As it is eleven o'clock at night, I offer you my respects, and remain,
ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

Your poor Aunt fainted this morning; she is much given to this, but it
was rather too long to-day.




[Pageheading: AMIABILITY OF THE PRINCE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _4th February 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I have now treated all the questions you wished
me to touch upon with Albert, and I was much pleased with his amiable
disposition. At a certain distance explanations by letter are next to
impossible, and each party in the end thinks the other unreasonable.
When he arrived he was rather exasperated about various things, and
pretty full of grievances. But our conversations have dissipated these
clouds, and now there will only remain the new parliamentary
events and consequences, which change a good deal of what one could
reasonably have foreseen or arranged. You will best treat these
questions now verbally. Albert is quick, not obstinate, in
conversation, and open to conviction if good arguments are brought
forward. When he thinks himself right he only wishes to have it
_proved_ that he _misunderstands_ the case, to give it up without
ill-humour. He is not inclined to be sulky, but I think that he may be
rendered a little melancholy if he thinks himself unfairly or unjustly
treated, but being together and remaining together, there _never_
can arise, I hope, any occasion for any disagreement even on trifling
subjects.... Ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _8th February 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--This letter will arrive when I trust you will
be most happily occupied; I don't mean therefore to trespass on your
time.

May Heaven render you as happy as I always wished you to be, and as I
always tried hard to see you. There is every prospect of it, and I
am sure you will be mistress in that respect of your own _avenir_.
_Perfect confidence_ will best ensure and consolidate this happiness.
Our rule in poor Charlotte's time was never to permit _one single day_
to pass over _ein Missverständniss_, however trifling it might be.[8]
I must do Charlotte the justice to say that she kept this compact most
religiously, and at times even more so than myself, as in my younger
days I was sometimes inclined to be sulky and silently displeased.
With this rule no misunderstandings can take root and be increased or
complicated by new ones being added to the old. Albert is gentle and
open to reason; all will therefore always be easily explained, and he
is determined never to be occupied but by what is important or useful
to you....

Now I conclude, with my renewed warmest and sincerest good wishes for
you, ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD.

    [Footnote 8: _(From an unpublished Contemporary Memoir by
    Admiral Sir William Hotham, G.C.B.)_

    "Her Royal Highness was now and then apt to give way to a high
    flow of animal spirits, natural at her time of life, and from
    carelessness more than unkindness to ridicule others. In one
    of these sallies of inconsiderate mirth, she perceived the
    Prince, sombre and cold, taking no apparent notice of what was
    going on, or if he did, evidently displeased. She at length
    spoke to him about it, and he at once manifested reluctance
    to join in the conversation, saying that though he had been a
    tolerably apt scholar in many things, he had yet to learn in
    England what pleasure was derived from the exercise of that
    faculty he understood to be called "quizzing"; that he could
    by no means reconcile it to himself according to any rule
    either of good breeding or benevolence. The tears instantly
    started in her eye, and feeling at once the severity and
    justice of the reproof, assured him most affectionately
    that, as it was the first time she had ever merited His Royal
    Highness's reproof on this subject, she assured him most
    solemnly it should be the last."]




[Pageheading: THE WEDDING-DAY]


_Queen Victoria to the Prince Albert._[9]

_10th February 1840._

DEAREST,--... How are you to-day, and have you slept well? I have
rested very well, and feel very comfortable to-day. What weather! I
believe, however, the rain will cease.

Send one word when you, my most dearly loved bridegroom, will be
ready. Thy ever-faithful,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 9: A note folded in _billet_ form, to be taken by
    hand. Addressed:

    "HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE.
    "THE QUEEN."

    This was the day of their marriage at the Chapel Royal. After
    the wedding breakfast at Buckingham Palace they drove to
    Windsor, and on the 14th they returned to London.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _11th February 1840._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I write to you from here, the happiest, happiest
Being that ever existed. Really, I do not think it _possible_ for any
one in the world to be _happier_, or AS happy as I am. He is an Angel,
and his kindness and affection for me is really touching. To look in
those dear eyes, and that dear sunny face, is enough to make me adore
him. What I can do to make him happy will be my greatest delight.
Independent of my great personal happiness, the reception we both
met with yesterday was the most gratifying and enthusiastic I ever
experienced; there was no end of the crowds in London, and all along
the road. I was a good deal tired last night, but am quite well again
to-day, and happy....

My love to dear Louise. Ever your affectionate,

VICTORIA R.




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _21st February 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I am more grateful than I can express that,
notwithstanding your many _empêchements_ and occupations, you still
found a little moment to write to me. News from you are always
most precious to me, and now almost more than ever. This is such
an important moment in your life, it will so much decide how the
remainder is to be, that I am deeply interested in all I can hear on
the subject. Hitherto, with the exception of your own dear and
Royal self, I have not been spoiled, _et j'ai puisé beaucoup de mes
nouvelles_ in the _Times_ and such like sources.

God be praised that the dear _ménage_ is so happy! I can only say may
it be so for ever and ever. I always thought that with your warm and
feeling heart and susceptibility for strong and lasting affection, you
would prefer this _genre_ of happiness, if you once possessed it, to
every other. It must be confessed that it is less frequent than could
be wished for the good of mankind, but when it does exist, there is
something delightful to a generous heart like yours in this sacred
tie, in this attachment for better for worse, and I think the English
Church service expresses it in a simple and touching manner.

I was happy to see that the Addresses of both Houses of Parliament
were voted in a decent and becoming way. How mean people are! If
they had not seen the public at large take a great interest in your
marriage and show you great affection, perhaps some would again have
tried to bring on unpleasant subjects....

My letter is grown long; I will therefore conclude it with the
expression of my great affection for your dear self. Ever, my most
beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: POPULAR ENTHUSIASM]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_6th March 1840._

... As your Majesty has by your Lord Chamberlain permitted plays to
be acted on Wednesdays and Fridays in Lent, it would be condemning
yourself if you did not go to see them if you like to do so....

... Lord Melbourne is much pleased to hear that your Majesty and
the Prince liked _The School for Scandal_. It is upon the whole the
cleverest comedy in the English language, the fullest of wit and at
the same time the most free from grossness.




[Pageheading: THE CORN LAWS]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_4th April 1840._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that the House of Commons having resumed the
consideration of the Corn Laws, the debate was closed by Sir Robert
Peel, in a speech much inferior to those which he usually makes. Mr
Warburton moved an adjournment, which caused many members to leave the
House. The motion being opposed, there were on a division 240 against
adjournment, and only 125 in favour of it.

Mr Warburton then by some blunder moved that the House adjourn, which
puts an end to the debate. This was eagerly caught at by the opposite
party, and agreed to. So that the question is lost by this ridiculous
termination, and it is to be feared that it will produce much
discontent in the manufacturing class.[10]

    [Footnote 10: The opposition to the Corn Laws was now
    increasing in the North.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_5th April 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is quite
well but much tired. He has so much to do this morning that he will
not be able to speak to Albemarle,[11] but if Albemarle dines at the
Palace, he certainly will then.

Lord Melbourne always feared anything like a mixture of the Stable
establishments. It would have been much better that what horses the
Prince had should have been kept quite separate, and that the horses
of your Majesty's which he should have to use should have been
settled, and some plan arranged by which they could have been obtained
when wanted. Horses to be used by one set of people and kept and fed
by another will never do. Servants and subordinate agents in England
are quite unmanageable in these respects. If they get [matters] into
their hands neither the Deity nor the Devil, nor both together, can
make them agree. Lord Melbourne writes this in ignorance of the actual
facts of the case, and therefore it may be inapplicable.

    [Footnote 11: Master of the Horse.]





_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_8th April 1840._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that Sir James Graham yesterday brought forward
his motion on China in a speech of nearly three hours.[12] He was
answered by Mr Macaulay in a manner most satisfactory to his audience,
and with great eloquence. Sir William Follett spoke with much
ingenuity, but in the confined spirit of a lawyer.

    [Footnote 12: The motion was to censure Ministers for their
    want of foresight in their dealings with China in connection
    with the extension of commerce, and with the opium trade. The
    motion was rejected by 271 to 262.]




[Pageheading: ENGLAND AND CHINA]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_9th April 1840._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that the debate went on yesterday, when Mr Hawes
spoke against the motion. In the course of the debate Mr Gladstone[13]
said the Chinese had a right to poison the wells, to keep away the
English! The debate was adjourned.

    [Footnote 13: Mr Gladstone had been member for Newark since
    1832.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_2nd May 1840._

Mr Cowper has just come in and tells me that they have determined to
begin the disturbance to-night at the Opera, at the very commencement
of the performance.[14] This may be awkward, as your Majesty will
arrive in the middle of the tumult. It is the intention not to permit
the opera to proceed until Laporte gives way.

Lord Melbourne is afraid that if the row has already begun, your
Majesty's presence will not put an end to it; and it might be as
well not to go until your Majesty hears that it is over and that the
performance is proceeding quietly. Some one might be sent to attend
and send word.

    [Footnote 14: A _fracas_ took place at the Opera on 29th
    April. The Manager, Laporte, not having engaged Tamburini
    to sing, the audience made a hostile demonstration at the
    conclusion of the performance of _I Puritani_. An explanation
    made by Laporte only made matters worse, and eventually the
    Tamburinists took possession of the stage.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_6th May 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has just
received this from Lord John Russell--a most shocking event,[15] which
your Majesty has probably by this time heard of. The persons who did
it came for the purpose of robbing the house; they entered by the back
of the house and went out at the front door.[16] The servants in the
house, only a man and a maid, never heard anything, and the maid, when
she came down to her master's door in the morning, found the horrid
deed perpetrated....

    [Footnote 15: The murder of Lord William Russell by his valet,
    Courvoisier, in Norfolk Street, Park Lane.]

    [Footnote 16: This was the original theory.]




[Pageheading: MURDER OF LORD WILLIAM RUSSELL]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_6th May 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Since he
wrote to your Majesty, he has seen Mr Fox Maule,[17] who had been
at the house in Norfolk Street. He says that it is a most mysterious
affair. Lord William Russell was found in his bed, quite dead, cold
and stiff, showing that the act had been perpetrated some time. The
bed was of course deluged with blood, but there were no marks of blood
in any other part of the room; so that he had been killed in his bed
and by one blow, upon the throat, which had nearly divided his head
from his body. The back door of the house was broken open, but there
were no traces of persons having approached the door from without.
His writing-desk was also broken open and the money taken out, but
otherwise little or nothing had been taken away. The police upon duty
in the streets had neither heard nor seen anything during the night.
In these circumstances strong suspicion lights upon the persons in
the house, two maids and a man, the latter a foreigner[18] and who had
only been with Lord William about five weeks. These persons are now
separately confined, and the Commissioners of Police are actively
employed in enquiring into the affair. An inquest will of course be
held upon the body without delay.

Lord Melbourne has just received your Majesty's letter, and will
immediately convey to Lord John your Majesty's kind expressions of
sympathy.

    [Footnote 17: Under-Secretary for Home Affairs; afterwards, as
    Lord Panmure, Secretary for War.]

    [Footnote 18: Courvoisier.]




[Pageheading: MRS NORTON]

[Pageheading: PRINCESS CHARLOTTE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _22nd May 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I received yesterday a most kind and dear letter
from your august hands. Charles,[19] who wanted to cross yesterday,
will have had very bad weather. He _is_ prepared not to make too long
a stay in England. He dined here on the 19th. Louise was prepared
to come to dinner, but was not quite equal to it; she therefore came
after it. He came also to see me on the 20th, before his departure for
Ostende. It is very gracious of you to have given him subsidies, but
in fact poor Feo stands more in need of it. She really is too poor;
when one thinks that they have but £600 a year, and that large
castles, etc., are to be kept up with it, one cannot conceive how they
manage it. It was a very generous feeling which prompted you to see
Mrs Norton, and I have been too much her friend to find fault with it.
True it is that Norton was freely accepted by her, but she was very
poor, and could therefore hardly venture to refuse him. Many people
will flirt with a clever, handsome, but poor girl, though not marry
her--besides, the idea of having old Shery[20] for a grandfather had
nothing very captivating. A very unpleasant husband Norton certainly
was, and one who had little tact. I can well believe that she was much
frightened, having so many eyes on her, some of which, perhaps, not
with the most amiable expression.

I was delighted to learn that you meant to visit poor Claremont, and
to pass there part of your precious birthday. Claremont is the place
where in younger days you were least plagued, and generally I saw you
there in good spirits. You will also _nolens volens_ be compelled to
think of me, and maybe of poor Charlotte.

This gives me an opening for saying a few words on this subject. I
found several times that some people had given you the impression that
poor Charlotte had been hasty and violent even to imperiousness and
_rudeness_. I can you assure that it was _not so_; she was quick, and
even violent, but I never have seen anybody so open to conviction, and
so fair and candid when wrong. The proverb says, and not without some
truth, that ladies come always back to the first words, to avoid any
symptom of having been convinced. Generous minds, however, do not do
this; they fight courageously their battles, but when they clearly see
that they are wrong, and that the reasons and arguments submitted to
them are _true_, they frankly admit the truth. Charlotte had eminently
this disposition; besides, she was so anxious to please me, that often
she would say: "Let it be as it may; provided you wish it, I will
do it." I always answered: "I never want anything for myself; when I
press something on you, it is from a conviction that it is for your
interest and for your good." I know that you have been told that she
ordered everything in the house and liked to show that she was the
mistress. It was not so. On the contrary, her pride was to make
me appear to my best advantage, and even to display respect and
obedience, when I least wanted it from her. She would almost
exaggerate the feeling, to show very clearly that she considered me as
her lord and master.

And on the day of the marriage, as most people suspected her of a very
different disposition, everybody was struck with the manner in which
she pronounced the promise of obedience. I must say that I was much
more the master of the house than is generally the case in private
life. Besides, there was something generous and royal in her mind
which alone would have prevented her doing anything vulgar or
ill-bred. What rendered her sometimes a little violent was a slight
disposition to jealousy. Poor Lady Maryborough,[21] at all times some
twelve or fifteen years older than myself, but whom I had much known
in 1814, was once much the cause of a fit of that description. I told
her it was quite childish, but she said, "it is not, because she is a
very coquettish, dissipated woman." The most difficult task I had was
to change her manners; she had something brusque and too rash in her
movements, which made the Regent quite unhappy, and which sometimes
was occasioned by a struggle between shyness and the necessity of
exerting herself. I had--I may say so without seeming to boast--the
manners of the best society of Europe, having early moved in it, and
been rather what is called in French _de la fleur des pois_. A good
judge I therefore was, but Charlotte found it rather hard to be so
scrutinised, and grumbled occasionally how I could so often find fault
with her.

Nothing perhaps speaks such volumes as the _positive fact_ of her
manners getting _quite changed_ within a year's time, and that to
the openly pronounced satisfaction of the very fastidious and not
over-partial Regent. To explain how it came that manners were a little
odd in England, it is necessary to remember that England had been for
more than ten years completely cut off from the rest of the world....

We have bitter cold weather which has given colds to both the
children. Uncle Ferdinand [22] is now only arriving _si dice_ on
Sunday next. He has been robbed of 15,000 francs in his own room _au
Palais-Royal_, which is very unpleasant for all parties.

My letter is so long that I must haste to conclude it, remaining ever,
my beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

My love to Alberto.

    [Footnote 19: Prince Charles of Leiningen.]

    [Footnote 20: The three sisters, Mrs Norton, Lady Dufferin,
    and Lady Seymour (afterwards Duchess of Somerset), the latter
    of whom was "Queen of Beauty" at the Eglinton Tournament, were
    grand-daughters of R. B. Sheridan. Lord Melbourne was much
    in Mrs Norton's company, and Norton, for whom the Premier had
    found a legal appointment, sued him in the Court of Common
    Pleas for _crim. con._; the jury found for the defendant.]

    [Footnote 21: Lord Maryborough (1763-1845) was William
    Wellesley Pole, brother of the Marquess Wellesley and the
    Duke of Wellington. He married Katherine Elizabeth Forbes,
    grand-daughter of the third Earl of Granard.]

    [Footnote 22: Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, King Leopold's
    brother.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN AND THE PRINCE]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

_Minutes of Conversations with Lord Melbourne and Baron Stockmar._

_28th May 1840._

_Lord Melbourne._--"I have spoken to the Queen, who says the Prince
complains of a want of confidence on trivial matters, and on all
matters connected with the politics of this country. She said it
proceeded entirely from indolence; she knew it was wrong, but when she
was with the Prince she preferred talking upon other subjects. I told
Her Majesty that she should try and alter this, and that there was
no objection to her conversing with the Prince upon any subject she
pleased. My impression is that the chief obstacle in Her Majesty's
mind is the fear of difference of opinion, and she thinks that
domestic harmony is more likely to follow from avoiding subjects
likely to create difference. My own experience leads me to think that
subjects between man and wife, even where difference is sure to ensue,
are much better discussed than avoided, for the latter course is sure
to beget distrust. I do not think that the Baroness[23] is the cause
of this want of openness, though her name to me is never mentioned by
the Queen."

_Baron Stockmar._--"I wish to have a talk with you. The Prince leans
more on you than any one else, and gives you his entire confidence;
you are honest, moral, and religious, and will not belie that trust.
The Queen has not started upon a right principle. She should by
degrees impart everything to him, but there is danger in his wishing
it all at once. A case may be laid before him; he may give some
crude and unformed opinion; the opinion may be taken and the result
disastrous, and a forcible argument is thus raised against advice
being asked for the future.

"The Queen is influenced more than she is aware of by the Baroness. In
consequence of that influence, she is not so ingenuous as she was two
years ago. I do not think that the withholding of her confidence does
proceed wholly from indolence, though it may partly arise, as the
Prince suggests, from the entire confidence which she reposes in her
present Ministers, making her inattentive to the plans and measures
proposed, and thinking it unnecessary entirely to comprehend them; she
is of necessity unable to impart their views and projects to him who
ought to be her friend and counsellor."

    [Footnote 23: Baroness Lehzen.]




[Pageheading: OXFORD'S ATTEMPT]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

CARLTON TERRACE, _10th June 1840._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
though your Majesty must be overwhelmed with congratulations at
your Majesty's escape from the aim of the assassin,[24] yet Viscount
Palmerston trusts that he may be allowed to express the horror with
which he heard of the diabolical attempt, and the deep thankfulness
which he feels at your Majesty's providential preservation.

Viscount Palmerston humbly trusts that the failure of this atrocious
attempt may be considered as an indication that your Majesty is
reserved for a long and prosperous reign, and is destined to assure,
for many years to come, the welfare and happiness of this nation.

    [Footnote 24: Edward Oxford, a pot-boy, aged eighteen, fired
    twice at the Queen on Constitution Hill. The Queen, who was
    untouched either shot, immediately drove to the Duchess of
    Kent's house to announce her safety. On his trial, Oxford was
    found to be insane.]




_The King of the French to Queen Victoria._

_11 Juin 1840._

MADAME MA S[OE]UR,--C'est avec une profonde indignation que je viens
d'apprendre l'horrible attentat qui a menacé les précieux jours de
votre Majesté. Je rends grâce du fond de mon c[oe]ur à la Divine
Providence qui les a miraculeusement conservés, et qui semble n'avoir
permis qu'ils fussent exposés à un si grand danger, que pour faire
briller aux yeux de tous, votre courage, votre sang-froid, et toutes
les qualités qui vous distinguent.

J'ose espérer que votre Majesté me permettra de recourir à son
entremise pour offrir à S.A.R. le Prince Albert, l'expression de tous
les sentiments dont je suis pénétré, et qu'elle voudra bien recevoir
l'assurance de tous ceux que je lui porte, ainsi que celle de ma haute
estime, de mon inaltérable attachement et de mon inviolable amitié. Je
suis, Madame ma S[oe]ur, de votre Majesté, le bon Frère,

LOUIS PHILIPPE R.




[Pageheading: A PROVIDENTIAL ESCAPE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_11th June 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and returns
your Majesty many, many thanks for your letter. Lord Melbourne was
indeed most anxious to learn that your Majesty was well this morning.
It was indeed a most awful and providential escape. It is impossible
not to shudder at the thought of it.

Lord Melbourne thinks that it will be necessary to have an examination
of this man before such of your Majesty's confidential servants as are
of the Privy Council;[25] it should take place this morning.

Addresses will be moved in both Houses immediately upon their meeting.

    [Footnote 25: _I.e._, the Cabinet.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _13th June 1840._

MY DEAREST AND MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--I cannot find words _strong
enough_ to express to you my horror at what happened on the 10th, and
my happiness and delight to see your escape from a danger which was
really very great. In your good little heart I hope that it made you
feel grateful to God for a protection which was very signal. It does
good and is a consolation to think that matters are not _quite_ left
to take care of _themselves_, but that an all-powerful Hand guides
them.

Louise I told the affair mildly, as it might have made too great an
impression on her otherwise. She always feels so much for you and
loves you so much, that she was rejoiced beyond measure that you
escaped so well and took the thing with so much _courage_. That you
have shown _great fortitude_ is not to be doubted, and will make a
very great and good impression. I see that the general feeling is
excellent, but what a melancholy thing to see a young man, without
provocation, capable of such a diabolical act! That attempts of that
sort took place against George III., and even George IV., one can
comprehend; but you have not only been extremely liberal, but in no
instance have you hitherto come into contact with any popular feeling
or prejudice; besides, one should think that your being a lady would
alone prevent such unmanly conduct. It shows what an effect bad
example and the bad press have. I am sure that this act is _une
singerie_ of what passes in France, that it is a fancy of some of
those societies _de Mort aux Rois et Souverains_, without knowing
wherefore, merely as a sort of fashion....




[Pageheading: EGYPT AND THE POWERS]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

ST CLOUD, _26th July 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--Your dear letter of the 19th greatly delighted
me....

Let me now add a few words on politics. The _secret_ way in which the
arrangement about the arbitration of the Turco-Egyptian affairs has
been signed, the keeping out of France in an affair so _near_ it
and touching its interests in various ways, has had here a very
_disastrous_ effect.[26] I cannot disguise from you that the
consequences may be very serious, and the more so as the Thiers
Ministry is supported by the movement party, and as _reckless of
consequences_ as your own Minister for Foreign Affairs, even much more
so, as Thiers himself would not be sorry to see everything existing
upset. He is strongly impregnated with all the notions of fame and
glory which belonged to part of the Republican and the Imperial times;
he would not even be much alarmed at the idea of a Convention ruling
again France, as he thinks that _he_ would be the _man to rule_ the
Assembly, and has told me last year that he thinks it for France
perhaps the _most powerful_ form of Government.[27]

The mode in this affair ought to have been, as soon as the Four Powers
had agreed on a proposition, to communicate it officially to France,
to join it. France had but two ways, either to join or to refuse
its adhesion. If it had chosen the last, it would have been a free
decision on her part, and a secession which had nothing offensive in
the eyes of the nation.

But there is a material difference between leaving a company from
motives of one's own, or being _kicked out_ of it. I must beg you to
speak seriously to Lord Melbourne, who is the head of your Government,
on these important affairs; they may upset everything in Europe if the
mistake is not corrected and moderated.

I shall write again to you next Friday from hence, and on Saturday,
1st August, we set off. Ever, my dearest Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 26: On the 15th of July a convention was signed in
    London by representatives of England, Russia, Austria, and
    Prussia, offering an ultimatum to the Viceroy of Egypt. The
    exclusion of France was hotly resented in Paris. Guizot,
    then Ambassador in London, had been kept in ignorance of the
    project, but the Foreign Secretary, Lord Palmerston, denied
    that there had been any discourtesy intended, or want of
    consideration shown.]

    [Footnote 27: Louis Adolphe Thiers (1797-1877), who through
    the Press had contributed to the downfall of the Bourbons, had
    held various Cabinet offices under Louis Philippe, and, from
    March to October 1840, was for the second time Premier.]




[Pageheading: PRINCE LOUIS NAPOLEON]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_7th August 1840._ (10 P.M.)

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. The House of
Lords lasted until eight, and Lord Melbourne might by an exertion have
got to the Palace to dinner, but as he had the Speech, by no means an
easy one, to prepare for the consideration of the Cabinet to-morrow,
he thought it better to take this evening for that purpose, and he
hopes therefore that your Majesty will excuse his not coming, which is
to him a great sacrifice to have made.

Your Majesty will have probably seen by this time the report from
your Majesty's Consul at Boulogne of the mad attempt of Louis
Bonaparte.[28] It is rather unfortunate that it should have taken
place at this moment, as the violent and excited temper of the French
nation will certainly lead them to attribute it to England. It will
also be highly embarrassing to the King of the French to have in
his possession a member of the family of Bonaparte and so many
Bonapartists who have certainly deserved death but whom it may not be
prudent or politic to execute.

    [Footnote 28: The Prince, afterwards the Emperor Napoleon
    III., descended on Boulogne with fifty-three persons, and
    a tame eagle which had been intended, with stage effect, to
    alight on the Colonne de Napoléon. He was captured, tried
    for high treason, and sentenced to perpetual imprisonment. He
    effected his escape, which was undoubtedly connived at by the
    authorities, in 1846.]




[Pageheading: THE CONVENTION OF 1828]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

WIESBADEN, _22nd September 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I was most happy in receiving this morning per
messenger your dear little letter of the 15th, though it is grown a
little elderly. The life one leads here is not favourable to writing,
which, besides, is prohibited, and easily gives me palpitation enough
to sing "_di tanti palpiti!_" I get up at half after six and begin to
drink this hot water; what with drinking and walking one comes to ten
o'clock or half after ten for breakfast. Then I read papers and such
like things. At one o'clock I have been generally bored with some
visit or other till two o'clock. I try to finish some writing, and
then I walk and ride out till dinner-time, generally at seven. In the
evening I have written sometimes, but it certainly does one harm. You
see that there remains but little time for writing.

I am most happy to find that you are well; the papers, which don't
know what to invent to lower the Funds, said that you had been unwell
on the 10th, which, God be praised! is not at all true.

I pity poor Princess Augusta[29] from all my heart. I am sure that if
she had in proper time taken care of herself she might have lived to
a great age. I have not time to-day to write at any length on the
politics of the day, but I am _far from thinking_ that the French
_acted wisely_ in the Oriental affair. I must say that I think
the King _meant well_, but I should not have _abstained_ from the
Conference as he did, though, in France, interference with Mehemet Ali
was certainly not popular. In England much of the _fond_ is logical,
but the form towards France was, and is still, harsh and insulting. I
don't think France, which these ten years behaved well, and the poor
King, who was nearly murdered I don't remember how often, deserved
to be treated so unkindly, and all that seemingly to please the great
Autocrat. We must not forget what were the fruits of the _first_
Convention of July 1828--I think the 16th or 26th of that month; I
ought to remember it, as I took its name in vain often enough in the
Greek affair.

This first Convention brought about the battle of Navarino and the
second campaign of the Russians, which ended with, in fact, the demise
of the poor old Porte, the _Treaty of Adrianople_.[30] Your Majesty
was then afflicted with the age of ten, in itself a good age, and may
not remember much about it except that in 1829 the affair about my
going to Greece began, and that your affectionate heart took some
interest in that. Lord Melbourne, however, you _must encourage to
speak about this matter_. Canning's intention was this: he said we
must remain with Russia, and by this means _prevent_ mischief. The
Duke of Wellington, who came to me shooting at Claremont in 1828,
really did cry, though he is not of a crying disposition, and said
"_by this Convention the Russians will have the power of doing all
they never would have dared to do single-handed_, and shielded by
this infernal Convention, it will not be in our power _to stop them_."
Russia is again in this very snug and comfortable position, that
_the special protection of the Porte_ is confided to its tender
mercies--_la chèvre gardant le chou_, the wolf the sheep, as I suppose
I must not compare the Turcs to lambs. The Power which ruined the
Ottoman Empire, which since a hundred and forty years nearly _pared_
it all round nearly in every direction, is to be the protector and
guardian of that same empire; and we are told that it is the most
scandalous calumny to suspect the Russians to have any other than the
most humane and disinterested views! "_ainsi soit-il_," as the French
say at the end of their sermons. This part of the Convention of the
15th of July 1840 strikes impartial people as strange, the more so
as nothing lowers the Porte so much in the eyes of the few patriotic
Turks who remain than the protection of the arch-enemy of the concern,
Russia. I beg you to read this part of my letter to my good and dear
friend, Lord Melbourne, to whom I beg to be kindly remembered.

    [Footnote 29: Princess Augusta, second daughter of George III.
    _See_ p. 230. (Ch. IX, 26th September 1840)]

    [Footnote 30: Under this treaty (14th September 1829) the
    Danubian principalities were made virtually independent
    States, the treaty rights of Russia in the navigation of the
    Bosphorus and Dardanelles were confirmed, and Greek affairs
    were arranged, by incorporating in the treaty the terms of the
    Protocol of 22nd March 1829.]




[Pageheading: A THREATENED CRISIS]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._[31]

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th September 1840._

This is certainly awkward; but the latter part about Peel is most
absurd; to him I can never apply, we must do everything but that. But
for God's sake do not bring on a crisis;[32] the Queen really could
not go through that _now_, and it might make her _seriously ill_ if
she were to be kept in a state of agitation and excitement if a crisis
were to come on; she has had already so much lately in the distressing
illness of her poor Aunt to harass her. I beseech you, think of _all_
this, and the consequences it might cause, not only to me, but to all
Europe, as it would show our weakness in a way that would be seriously
injurious to this country.

    [Footnote 31: The letter, to which this is a reply, seems not
    to have been preserved. The Queen's letter, having been shown
    to Lord John Russell and copied by him, has hitherto been
    supposed to be a letter from Lord Melbourne to Lord John
    Russell. _See_ Walpole's _Russell_, vol. i., chap. xiii.]

    [Footnote 32: The Cabinet met on the 28th to consider
    the Oriental Question. The Government was on the verge of
    dissolution, as Lord Palmerston and Lord John Russell were in
    conflict. The meeting was adjourned till 1st October.]




[Pageheading: FRANCE AND THE EAST]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th September 1840._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I have unfortunately very little time to-day, but
I will try and answer your kind letters of the 13th and 19th briefly.
You know now that the sufferings of good excellent Aunt Augusta
were terminated on the 22nd of this month. I regret her _very, very_
sincerely, though for herself we are all most thankful for the release
of such unexampled sufferings, borne with such unexampled patience.
Almost the last thing she said when she was still conscious, the day
before she died, was to Mr More (the apothecary), who wrote me every
morning a Report: "Have you written to my darling?" Is this not
touching? The Queen-Dowager had her hand in hers when she died, and
closed her eyes when all was over; all the Family were present.

I have seen your letters to Palmerston, and his answer to you, and I
also send you a paper from Lord Melbourne. I assure you that I _do_
give these affairs my _most serious_ attention: it would be indeed
_most_ desirable if France could _come back to us_, and I think what
Metternich suggests very sagacious and well-judged.[33] You must allow
me to state that _France_ has _put herself_ into this unfortunate
state. _I_ know (as I saw _all_ the _papers_) how she was engaged
to join us--and I know how strangely she refused; I know also, that
France _agrees_ in the _principle_, but only doubts the _efficacy_ of
the measures. Where then is "_La France outragée_"? wherefore arm when
there is _no_ enemy? wherefore raise the war-cry? But this has been
_done_, and has taken _more_ effect than I think the French Government
_now_ like; and _now_ she has to undo all this and to calm the general
agitation and excitement, which is not so easy. Still, though France
is in the wrong, and _quite_ in the wrong, still _I_ am most anxious,
as I am sure my Government also are, that France should be pacified
and should again take her place amongst the five Powers. I am sure she
might easily do this....

Albert, who sends his love, is much occupied with the Eastern affairs,
and is quite of my opinion....

    [Footnote 33: Metternich's suggestion was that if other
    means of coercion failed, the allies should renew their
    deliberations in conjunction with France.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _30th September 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is quite
well, and will be ready at half-past one.

The Prince's[34] observations are just, but still the making an
advance to France now, coupled with our constant inability to carry
into effect the terms of our Convention, will be an humiliating step.

Lord Melbourne sends a letter which he has received this morning from
Lord Normanby, whom he had desired to see Lord Palmerston and Lord
John Russell, and try what he could do.

Lord Melbourne also sends a letter which he has received from Lord
Lansdowne.

Lord Melbourne would beg your Majesty to return them both.

    [Footnote 34: Prince Metternich.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

DOWNING STREET, _1st October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. We have had
the Cabinet and it has passed over quietly. We have agreed to make
a proposition to France founded upon the communication of Prince
Metternich to the King of the Belgians.[35] Palmerston will propose
to-morrow to Neumann,[36] the Prussian Minister, and Brunnow,[37] that
he should write to Granville, authorising him to acquaint Thiers that
if France will concur in respecting the principle of the treaty, we,
without expecting her to adopt coercive measures, will concert with
her the further course to be adopted for the purpose of carrying the
principle into effect. This is so far so good. Lord Melbourne trusts
that it will get over the present entanglement, but of course we must
expect that in a matter so complicated and which we have not the power
of immediately terminating, further difficulties will arise.

    [Footnote 35: _See_ p. 231. (Ch. IX, Footnote 33)]

    [Footnote 36: Austrian Minister.]

    [Footnote 37: Russian Minister.]




[Pageheading: MEHEMET ALI]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

DOWNING STREET, _2nd October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. We have just
had another Cabinet,[38] which was rendered necessary by Brunnow
and the Prussian Minister refusing to concur in what we determined
yesterday without reference to their Courts and authority from
them. This makes it impossible for us to take the step in the way
we proposed, but we have now settled that Palmerston should direct
Granville to submit the proposition to Thiers, and ask him how he
would be disposed to receive it if it were formally made to him. This,
so far as we are concerned, will have all the effect which could have
been attained in the other way.

Very important despatches of the 14th inst. have come from
Constantinople. The Ministers of the Porte held the last proposition
of Mehemet Ali as a positive refusal of the terms of the Convention,
and proceeded by the advice of Lord Ponsonby[39] at once to divest
Mehemet Ali of the Pashalik of Egypt; to direct a blockade of the
coasts both of Syria and Egypt, and to recall the four Consuls from
Alexandria. These are serious measures, and there are despatches from
Lord Beauvale[40] stating that Prince Metternich is much alarmed at
them, and thinks that measures should be immediately taken to diminish
and guard against the effect which they may have in France. Lord
Melbourne humbly begs your Majesty's pardon for this hurried scrawl
upon matters of such importance, but Lord Melbourne will have
the opportunity of speaking to your Majesty more fully upon them
to-morrow.

    [Footnote 38: The peace party in the Cabinet were defeated and
    Palmerston triumphant.]

    [Footnote 39: British Ambassador at Constantinople.]

    [Footnote 40: Frederick James Lamb, younger brother of Lord
    Melbourne, and his successor in the title (1782-1853). He
    was at this time Ambassador at Vienna, having previously been
    Ambassador at Lisbon.]




[Pageheading: PALMERSTON AND FRANCE]

[Pageheading: VIEWS OF LOUIS PHILIPPE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

WIESBADEN, _2nd October 1840._

... There is an idea that Mehemet Ali suffers from what one calls _un
charbon_, a sort of dangerous ulcer which, with old people, is never
without some danger. If this is true, it only shows how little one can
say that the Pashalik of Aleppo is to decide who is to be the master
of the Ottoman Empire in Europe and Asia, the Sultan or Mehemet? It is
highly probable that if the old gentleman dies, his concern will go to
pieces; a division will be attempted by the children, but that in the
East hardly ever succeeds. There everything is personal, except the
sort of Caliphate which the Sultan possesses, and when the man is
gone, his empire _also goes_. Runjeet Singh[41] is a proof of this;
his formidable power will certainly go to the dogs, though the Sikhs
have a social link which does not exist in the Egyptian concern. If we
now were to set everything in Europe on a blaze, have a war which may
change totally all that now exists, and in the midst of it we should
hear that Mehemet is no more, and his whole _boutique_ broken up,
would it not be _really laughable_, if it was not _melancholy_? And
still the war _once raging_, it would no longer put a stop to it, but
go on for _other reasons_.

I cannot understand what has rendered Palmerston so _extremely hostile
to the King_ and Government of France. A _little civility_ would have
gone a great way with the French; if in your Speech on the 11th of
August some regret had been expressed, it would have greatly modified
the feelings of the French. But Palmerston _likes to put his foot on
their necks_! _Now, no statesman must triumph over an enemy that is
not quite dead_, because people forget a real loss, a real misfortune,
but they won't forget _an insult_. Napoleon made great mistakes that
way; he hated Prussia, insulted it on all occasions, but still _left
it alive_. The consequence was that in 1813 they rose to a man in
Prussia, even children and women took arms, not only because they had
been injured, but because they had been treated with _contempt_ and
_insulted_. I will here copy what the King wrote to me lately from
Paris:

"Vous ne vous faites pas d'idée à quel point l'approbation publique
soutient les armements, c'est universel. Je regrette que cela aille
bien au-delà, car la fureur contre l'Angleterre s'accroît et un
des points que je regrette le plus, c'est que tout notre peuple est
persuadé que l'Angleterre veut réduire la France _au rang de Puissance
secondaire_, et vous savez ce que c'est que l'orgueil national et la
vanité de tous les peuples. Je crois donc bien urgent que la crise
actuelle se termine bientôt pacifiquement. Plus je crois que l'union
de l'Angleterre et de la France est la base du repos du monde, plue je
regrette de voir susciter tant d'irritation entre nos deux Nations.
La question est de savoir ce que veut véritablement le Gouvernement
Anglais. J'avoue que je ne suis pas sans crainte et sans inquiétude à
cet égard quand je récapitule dans ma tête tout ce que Lord Ponsonby
a fait pour l'allumer et tout ce qu'il fait encore. Je n'aurais aucune
inquiétude si je croyais que le Gouvernement suivrait la voix de
sa Nation, et les véritables intérêts de son pays qui repoussent
l'alliance Russe et indiquent celle de la France, ce qui est
tout-à-fait conforme à mes v[oe]ux personnels. Mais ma vieille
expérience me rappelle ce que font les passions personnelles, qui
prédominent bien plus de nos jours que les véritables intérêts, et ce
que peut le Gouvernement Anglais pour entraîner son pays, et je
crains beaucoup l'art de la Russie ou plutôt de l'Empereur Nicolas
de captiver, par les plus immenses flatteries, les Ministres Anglais,
preuve Lord Durham. Or si ces deux Gouvernements veulent ou osent
entreprendre _l'abaissement_ de la France, la guerre s'allumera, et
pour _mon compte alors je m'y_ jetterai _à outrance_, mais si comme
je l'espère encore, malgré mes soupçons, ils ne veulent pas la guerre,
alors l'affaire de l'Orient, s'arrangera à l'amiable, et le cri de
toutes les Nations fera de nouveau justice de ces humeurs belliqueuses
et consolidera la paix générale, comme cela est arrivé dans les
premières années de mon règne."

I think it right to give you this extract, as it is written from
the very bottom of the King's heart, and shows the way in which he
considers the present position of affairs. Perhaps you will be so
kind to read it or to let it be read by Lord Melbourne. It is
this _abaissement de la France_ which now sticks in their throats.
Chartres[42] has quite the same feeling, and then the refrain is,
_plutôt périr que de souffrir cette ignominie!_

Really my paper is abominable, but it is a great shame that in the
residence of such a rich Prince nothing can be had. My letter being
long, I conclude it with my best blessings. Ever, my dearest Victoria,
your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 41: Runjeet Singh, known as the Lion of the Punjab,
    had died in 1839, having consolidated the Sikh power. As an
    outcome of the Sikh wars in 1846 and 1848, the Punjab was
    annexed by Great Britain in 1849.]

    [Footnote 42: Ferdinand, Duke of Orléans, who died 13th July
    1842, was generally called Chartres in the family circle; this
    title, which he had previously borne, was conferred on his
    younger son, born 9th November 1840.]




[Pageheading: NEGOTIATIONS WITH FRANCE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

CLAREMONT, _6th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. The King's
letter to Lord Melbourne is in many respects just and true.[43] The
practical measure which it recommends, namely, that Lord Granville
should make to Thiers a general proposition for settling the whole
matter, is very much the same as that which we agreed upon at the
Cabinet should be adopted. Lord Melbourne expects that this has been
carried into effect, and if it has not, Lord Melbourne has urged that
it should be done without delay.

These affairs are very troublesome and vexatious, but they are,
unfortunately, more than troublesome, they are pregnant with danger.

    [Footnote 43: The King of the Belgians had written a letter
    to Lord Melbourne on 1st October, which he had sent to
    Queen Victoria, asking her to read it and forward it to Lord
    Melbourne.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

WIESBADEN, _6th October 1840._

... It is to-day the poor King of the French's birthday; he is
sixty-seven years old, and these last ten years he has had a pleasant
time of it. And now he has this serious and difficult complication to
deal with, and still I find him always fair and amiable in his way
of looking at all these things, and bearing the almost unbearable
annoyance and plagues of his arduous position with a degree of
firmness and courage worthy of kinder treatment from the European
Powers than he has received....




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _9th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Lord John
Russell has directed a Cabinet to be summoned for to-morrow at three
o'clock, at which he intends to propose that "Instructions should be
sent to Lord Granville to ascertain from the French Government what
terms France would consider satisfactory for the immediate arrangement
of the affairs of the East."

That if such terms shall appear satisfactory, Mr Henry Bulwer[44] or
some person of similar rank should be sent to Constantinople to urge
their acceptance on the Sultan, and that our Allies should be invited
to co-operate in that negotiation.

That the French Government should be informed that the only mode in
which the pacification can be carried into effect is by Mehemet Ali's
accepting the terms of the treaty and then receiving from the Sultan
the terms which shall have been previously agreed upon by his Allies.

Lord Melbourne feels certain that Lord Palmerston will not accede
to these proposals, and indeed Lord Melbourne himself much doubts
whether, after all that has passed, it would be right to submit the
whole matter, as it were, to the decision and arbitration of France.
Lord John Russell seems very much determined to press this question
to a decision to-morrow, and Lord Melbourne much fears that such a
decision may lead to serious consequences.

Lord Melbourne is much grieved to have to send your Majesty
intelligence which he knows will greatly disquiet your Majesty, but
there is no remedy for it.

Lord Melbourne's lumbago is somewhat better to-day but not much. His
being compelled to attend at the House of Lords yesterday prevented
him from recovering. He has remained in bed to-day, and hopes to be
better to-morrow.

    [Footnote 44: Henry Bulwer (1801-1872), afterwards Lord
    Dalling, then First Secretary of the Embassy in Paris, became
    Minister to Spain, 1843-1848; to the United States, 1849-1852;
    to Tuscany, 1852-1855; and Ambassador to Turkey, 1858-1865.]




[Pageheading: PACIFIC INSTRUCTIONS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _9th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has just
received your Majesty's box. He will do all he can to put everything
together, and it does not appear to him that there is any necessity
on any side for a decisive step at present. A letter is arrived to-day
from Bulwer, which states that the instructions given to Guizot are,
through the interposition of the King, of a very pacific character. It
would surely be well to see what they are, and whether they will not
afford the means of arranging the whole affair.

Lord Melbourne thought with your Majesty that the letter to Lord
Granville upon Prince Metternich's proposition was a great deal too
short and dry and slight, but the importance of this step is now a
good deal superseded by what has taken place, and the position
of affairs has already become different from that in which it was
resolved upon.

Lord Melbourne very much thanks the Prince for his letter, which may
do much service and have an effect upon the antagonists.

Lord Melbourne has just seen Dr Holland.[45] Lord Melbourne is very
much crippled and disabled. Lord Melbourne does not think that the
shooting has had anything to do with it. His stomach has lately been
out of order, which is always the cause of these sort of attacks. Lord
Melbourne will come down on Sunday if he possibly can, and unless he
should be still disabled from moving.

    [Footnote 45: Dr (afterwards Sir) Henry Holland,
    Physician-in-Ordinary to the Queen, 1850-1873, father of Lord
    Knutsford.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _10th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. ... All
the question at the Cabinet to-day as to whether we should write
a communication to France was fortunately put an end to by Guizot
desiring to see Palmerston in the morning and making a communication
to him. This communication is very much in substance what Mr. Bulwer's
note had led us to expect. It is a strong condemnation of the act
of the Porte depriving Mehemet Ali of the Government of Egypt,
an expression of satisfaction at having already learned from Lord
Palmerston and Count Apponyi[46] that Austria and England are not
prepared to consider this act as irrevocable, and a threat on the
part of France that he considers the power of Mehemet Ali in Egypt a
constituent part of the balance of Europe, and that he cannot permit
him to be deprived of that province without interfering. It was
determined that this intimation should be met in an amicable spirit,
and that Lord Palmerston should see the Ministers of the other Powers
and agree with them to acquaint the French that they with England
would use their good offices to induce the Porte not to insist upon
the deprivation of Mehemet Ali as far as Egypt is concerned. Lord
Melbourne hopes that this transaction may lead to a general settlement
of the whole question.

Lord Melbourne feels himself much fatigued to-night. Though better, he
is yet far from well, and he knows by experience that this malady when
once it lays hold of him does not easily let go. It was so when he was
younger. He fears, therefore, that it will not be prudent for him to
leave town so early as Monday, but will do so as soon as he can with
safety.

    [Footnote 46: Born 1782; at this time the Austrian Ambassador
    in France.]



[Pageheading: MEHEMET ALI]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

PANSHANGER, _11th October 1840._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty.

Viscount Palmerston submits to your Majesty some interesting letters,
which he received some days ago from Paris, showing that there never
has been any real foundation for the alarm of war with France which
was felt by some persons in this country.

Viscount Palmerston also submits a despatch from Mons. Thiers to Mons.
Guizot which was communicated to him yesterday by Mons. Guizot,
and which seems to open a prospect of an amicable and satisfactory
understanding between France and the Four Powers.

Viscount Palmerston also submits a note from Mr Bulwer intimating that
the French Government would be contented with an arrangement which
should leave Mehemet Ali in possession of Egypt alone, without any
part of Syria, and Viscount Palmerston submits that such is the
arrangement which it would on all accounts be desirable to accomplish.
There seems reason to think that the bombardment of Beyrout[47] and
the deposal of Mehemet Ali by the Sultan have greatly contributed to
render the French more reasonable on this question, by exciting in
their minds an apprehension that unless some arrangement be speedily
effected, the operations now going on in the Levant will end in the
entire overthrow of Mehemet Ali.

    [Footnote 47: On 10th October Ibrahim was defeated by
    the Allies, and next day Beyrout was occupied by British,
    Austrian, and Turkish troops.]




[Pageheading: GUIZOT AND THIERS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _11th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has not
written before to-day, because he had nothing new to lay before your
Majesty. Lord Melbourne anxiously hopes she feels some confidence
that the present state of the Eastern affairs is such as may lead to
a speedy, amicable termination--at the same time, with a nation so
irritable as the French, and with the Constitution which they have and
which they are unused to exercise, it is impossible to feel secure
for a moment. Guizot, when he gave the despatch of Thiers to Lord
Palmerston, said that he had nothing to do with the reasonings of that
despatch, and would not enter into any argument upon them.

He delivered them only in his official capacity as the Ambassador of
the King of France. All he would say was that they were the result of
a great effort of that party in France which was for peace. This was a
sufficient intimation that he himself did not approve of them, but it
was not possible to collect from what he said upon what grounds his
dissent was founded. Lord Melbourne has since heard that he says, that
he considers that France has taken too low a tone and has made too
much concession, and that he could not have been a party to this step
if he had been one of the King's Ministers. The step is also probably
contrary to the declared opinion of M. Thiers; whether it be contrary
to his real opinion is another question. But if it was written
principally by the influence of the King, it is a measure at once bold
and friendly upon his part, and the success of which will much depend
upon its being met in an amicable spirit here.

Lord Melbourne returns the letter of the King of the Belgians. Lord
Melbourne kept it because he wished to show it to Lord John Russell,
and some others, as containing an authentic statement of the feelings
of the King of the French, which it is well that they should know....




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Palmerston._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _12th October 1840._

The Queen in returning these letters must express to Lord Palmerston
her very great satisfaction at the favourable turn affairs have taken,
and the Queen earnestly trusts that this demonstration of returning
amity on the part of France will be met in a very friendly spirit
by Lord Palmerston and the rest of her Government. The Queen feels
certain that this change on the part of France is also greatly owing
to the peaceable disposition of the King of the French, and she thinks
that in consideration of the difficulties the King has had to contend
with, and which he seems finally to have overcome, we should make
some return; and indeed, as Lord Palmerston states, the arrangement
proposed is the best which can be desired.




[Pageheading: FEELING IN FRANCE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _12th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is much
better to-day, free from pain and difficulty of moving, but he thinks
that it would not be prudent, and that he should run the risk of
bringing back the complaint, if he should leave town to-morrow.

He thinks it might also be imprudent in another point of view, as
affairs are still in a very unsettled state, and the rest of the
Cabinet watch with great impatience, and, to say the truth, not
without suspicion, the manner in which Palmerston will carry into
effect the decision of Saturday. They are particularly anxious
for speed, and I have written both last night and this morning to
Palmerston, to urge him not to delay. He will go down to Windsor
to-morrow, and your Majesty will then have an opportunity of speaking
to him, upon which Lord Melbourne will write again to your Majesty.

Guizot has been with Lord Melbourne this morning for the purpose of
repeating what he had before said to Palmerston, that the Note which
he delivered on Saturday was the result of a great effort made by the
party who are for peace, that it had been conquered against a strong
opposition, that if it were not taken advantage of here now, it would
not be renewed, that the conduct of affairs in France would probably
fall into the hands of the violent party, and that it would be no
longer possible to control the excited feelings of the people of
France.

The worst is that Palmerston, and John Russell, with now the
greater part of the Cabinet, proceed upon principles, opinions, and
expectations which are entirely different from one another, and which
therefore necessarily lead to a different course of action. We are
anxious to finish the business speedily, because we fear that there is
danger of the Government of France being forced into violent measures
by popular outcry. Palmerston, on the contrary, thinks that there is
no danger of war, that the French do not mean war, and that there is
no feeling in France but what has been produced by the Ministry and
their instruments the Press.

We are anxious that the opportunity should be seized now whilst we
have the appearance of success in Syria, not being at all confident of
the ultimate result. Palmerston, on the contrary, is so confident of
complete success, that he wishes to delay concluding the affair until
he can have the benefit of the full advantages, which he anticipates,
in the negotiation.

We should be too glad to see the matter settled, leaving Mehemet Ali
in possession of Egypt.

Palmerston has both the wish and the hope of getting him out of Egypt,
as well as Syria.

These great differences of view, object, and expectation render it
difficult for those who hold them to pursue the same line of conduct.

There is also, as your Majesty knows, much suspicion, distrust and
irritation, and all these circumstances throw great obstacles in the
way of the progress of affairs, but Lord Melbourne hopes that they
will all be overcome, and that we shall arrive at a safe conclusion.




[Pageheading: RELATIONS WITH FRANCE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _13th October 1840._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. It is
absolutely necessary that we should have a Cabinet on Thursday. There
is so much natural impatience, and so deep an interest taken in what
is now going on, that it cannot be avoided....

Your Majesty will naturally seize this opportunity of stating strongly
to Palmerston your wishes that this opportunity should be taken
advantage of, with a view to the speedy accommodation of the whole
difference. Your Majesty will see the necessity of at the same
time not appearing to take too much the part of France, which might
irritate and indispose.

Your Majesty will find John Russell perfectly right and reasonable.
He was before somewhat embarrassed by the position in which he was
placed. Having agreed to the Convention, it was difficult for him to
take steps which might appear to be in departure from its policy, and
to be occasioned by the gravity of its consequences. But this step
upon the part of France will enable all the friends of peace to act
cordially together. John Russell thinks that you have not been put
fully in possession of his sentiments. Lord Melbourne thinks this is
not the case; but it would be well if your Majesty would try to efface
this impression from his mind as much as possible.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_13th October 1840._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,-- ... I have three kind letters of yours unanswered
before me, of the 1st, 2nd, and 6th, for which many thanks. My time is
very short indeed to-day, but Albert has, I know, written to you about
the favourable turn which the Oriental affairs have taken, and of the
proposition of France, which is very amicably received here; Austria
and Prussia are quite ready to agree, but Brunnow has been making
already difficulties (this is in confidence to you). I hope and
trust that this will at length settle the affair, and that peace, the
blessings of which are innumerable, will be preserved. I feel we
owe _much_ of the change of the conduct of France to the peaceable
disposition of the dear King, for which I feel grateful.[48] Pray,
dear Uncle, when an opportunity offers, do offer the King my best,
sincerest wishes for his health and happiness in _every_ way, on the
occasion of his birthday; may he live many years, for the benefit of
all Europe!...

    [Footnote 48: The King of the French was alarmed at the
    warlike language of his Ministers. He checked the preparations
    for war which Thiers was making; he went further, and on
    the 24th of October he dismissed the Thiers Ministry, and
    entrusted the management of affairs to Soult and Guizot,
    who were pacifically inclined and anxious to preserve the
    Anglo-French _entente_.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S INFLUENCE]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _16th October 1840._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I received your kind but anxious letter of the
10th, the day before yesterday, and hasten to reply to it by the
courier who goes to-day. Indeed, dearest Uncle, I have worked hard
this last week to bring about something conciliatory, and I hope and
trust I have succeeded. Lord Melbourne, who left Claremont on the
same day as we did, was confined to the house till yesterday, when he
arrived here, by a lumbago and bilious attack; but I had a constant
correspondence with him on this unfortunate and alarming question, and
he is, I can assure you, fully aware of the danger, and as anxious as
we are to set matters right; and so is Lord John, and Palmerston, I
hope, is getting more reasonable. They have settled in consequence of
Thiers' two despatches that Palmerston should write to Lord Ponsonby
to urge the Porte _not_ to dispossess Mehemet Ali finally of Egypt,
and I believe the other foreign Ministers at Constantinople will
receive similar instructions; this despatch Palmerston will send to
Granville (to-night, I believe) to be communicated to Thiers, and _I_
have made Palmerston _promise_ to put into the despatch to Granville
"that it would be a source of great satisfaction to England, if this
would be the cause of bringing back France to that alliance (with
the other Four Powers) from which we had seen her depart with so much
regret." I hope this will have a good effect. Now, in _my_ humble
opinion (but this I say of myself and without anybody's knowledge),
if France, upon this, were to make some sort of advance, and were to
_cease arming_, I think all would do; for you see, if France goes on
arming, we shall hardly be justified in not doing the same, and that
would be very bad. Couldn't you suggest this to the King and Thiers,
as of yourself? My anxiety is great for the return of amity and
concord, I can assure you. I think our child ought to have besides its
other names those of _Turco Egypto_, as we think of nothing else!
I had a long talk with Palmerston on Wednesday, and also with J.
Russell.

I hope I have done good. The Dutch don't like the abdication. I'm so
sorry for poor little Paris![49]

Pray excuse this dreadful scrawl, but I am so hurried. Ever your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 49: The Comte de Paris, born 24th August 1838,
    eldest son of Ferdinand, Duke of Orleans, who was Louis
    Philippe's eldest son.]




[Pageheading: ATTEMPT ON LOUIS PHILIPPE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _17th October 1840._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--You will, I am sure, have been very much shocked
on hearing that on the 15th there was a new attempt made to kill the
poor good King at Paris.[50] The place was cleverly chosen, as the
King generally puts his head out of the carriage window to bow to
the guard. I join the letter which he had the goodness to forward us
through an _estafette_.[51] May this melancholy _attentat_ impress
on your Ministers the necessity of aiding the King in his arduous
task.... You will have the goodness to show this letter to Albert.

Louise was much alarmed when it arrived at such an unusual hour; it
was ten o'clock. At first we thought it might be something about poor
little Paris, who is not yet so well as one could wish.

We have gloomy miserable weather, and I feel much disgusted with this
part of the world. Ever, my beloved Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 50: The King was fired at as he was leaving the
    Tuileries, by Darmes, a Marseillais. As Croker wrote to Lord
    Brougham on the 31st of October 1840:--"Poor Louis Philippe
    lives the life of a mad dog, and will soon, I fear, suffer the
    death of that general object of every man's shot."]

    [Footnote 51: Express messenger.]




[Pageheading: FRANCE AND EGYPT]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _20th October 1840._

MY MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--I must write to you a few lines by M.
Drouet, who returns to-morrow morning to England. _God bless you_
for the _great zeal_ you have _mis en action_ for our great work,
the maintenance of peace; it is one of the greatest importance for
everything worth caring for in Europe. You know well that no personal
interest guides me in my exertions; I am in fact bored with being
here, and shall ever regret to have remained in these regions, when I
might so easily have gone myself to the Orient, the great object of my
predilection.

I never shall advise anything which would be against the interests and
honour of yourself, your Government, or your country, in which I have
so great a stake myself. The great thing now is _not to refuse to
negotiate_ with France, even if it should end in nothing. Still for
the King Louis Philippe there is an _immense strength_ and facility in
that word "_nous négocions_"; with this he may get over the opening of
the session, and this once done, one may hope to come to a conclusion.
Since I wrote to Lord Melbourne to-day, I have received a letter
from the King, of the 19th, _i.e._ yesterday, in which he tells me,
"_Pourvu qu'il y ait, pour commencer, des négociations, cela me donne
une grande force._"

I have written yesterday to him most fully a letter he may show Thiers
also concerning the armaments. I think that my arguments will make
some impression on Thiers. The King writes me word that by dint of
great exertion he had brought Thiers to be more moderate. If it was
possible to bring France and Mehemet Ali to agree to the greatest part
of the Treaty, it will be worth while for everybody to consent. The
way to bring France to join in some arrangement, and to take the
engagement to compel Mehemet to accept it, would be the best practical
way to come to a conclusion. It is probable, though I know nothing
about it in any positive way, that the efforts of getting possession
of Syria will fail, if the country itself does not take up arms on a
large scale, which seems not to be believed.

To conclude then my somewhat hurried argumentation, the greatest
thing is to negotiate. The negotiation cannot now have the effect of
weakening the execution as that goes on, and it may have the advantage
of covering the non-success if that should take place, which is at
all events possible if not probable. May I beg you to read these few
confused words to Lord Melbourne as a supplement of my letter to him.
Darmes says that if Chartres had been with the King, he would not
have fired, but that his reason for wishing to kill the King was his
conviction that one could not hope for war till he was dead.

It is really melancholy to see the poor King taking this _acharnement_
very much to heart, and upon my word, the other Powers of Europe owe
it to themselves and to him to do everything to ease and strengthen
his awful task.

What do you say to poor Christina's departure?[52] I am sorry for it,
and for the poor children. She is believed to be very rich.

Now I must conclude, but not without thanking you once more for your
_great and most laudable exertions_, and wishing you every happiness,
which you so _much deserve_. Ever, my most beloved Victoria, your
devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 52: Queen Christina abdicated the Regency of Spain,
    and went to Paris. In the following May General Espartero,
    Duke of Vittoria, was appointed sole Regent.]




[Pageheading: DEATH OF LORD HOLLAND]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _23rd October 1840._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Many thanks for your two kind letters of the 17th
and 20th. I have very little time to-day, and it being besides _not_
my regular day, I must beg you to excuse this letter being very short.
I return you the King's letters with _bien des remercîments_. It is
a horrid business. We have had accounts of successes on the Syrian
coast. Guizot is here since Wednesday, and goes this morning. Albert
(who desires me to thank you for your kind letter) has been talking
to him, and so have I, and he promised in return for my expressions of
sincere anxiety to see matters _raccommodées_, to do all in his power
to do so. "_Je ne vais que pour cela_," he said.

We were much shocked yesterday at the sudden death of poor good, old
Lord Holland.[53] I send you Dr Holland's letter to Lord Melbourne
about it. He is a great loss, and to _Society_ an irreparable one. I'm
sure you will be sorry for it.

Mamma comes back sooner than the 31st. She is in great distress at
poor Polly's death. You will regret him. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Pray _do_ try and get the King's Speech to be _pacific_, else
Parliament must meet here in November, which would be dreadful for me.

    [Footnote 53: Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, who,
    by reason of his social influence, great wealth, and high
    intellectual endowments, was one of the most efficient
    supporters of the Whig party.]




_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _26th October 1840._

... The Duke of Cambridge arrived, as you know, before yesterday
evening, at Brussels. Your Uncle visited him yesterday, and at six he
came to Laeken to dine with us. I found him looking well, and he
was as usual very good-natured and kind. I need not tell you that
conversation did not flag between us, and that I thought of you almost
the whole time. In the course of the evening he took leave. He left
Brussels this morning early, on his way to Calais, and I suppose you
will hear of him before this letter reaches you. He took charge of all
my love and _hommages_ for you, dear Albert, and all the Royal Family.
Before dinner the children were presented to him (that is Leopold
and Philippe), but I am sorry to say that poor Lippchen was so much
frightened with his appearance, loud voice, and black gloves, that he
burst out crying, and that we were obliged to send him away. The
Duke took his shyness very kindly; but I am still ashamed with his
behaviour.




[Pageheading: NEWS FROM SYRIA]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

CARLTON TERRACE, _8th November 1840._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and in
addition to the good news from Syria, which confirms the defeat and
dispersion of the forces, both of Ibrahim and of Solyman Pasha, with
the loss of 8,000 prisoners, 24 pieces of cannon, the whole of
their camp, baggage, and stores, followed by the flight of those two
Generals with a small escort, he has the satisfaction of informing
your Majesty that the new French Ministers had a majority of 68, upon
the vote for the election of the President of the Chamber.[54]

This majority, so far exceeding any previous calculation, seems to
place the stability of the Government beyond a doubt, though it must,
of course, be expected that upon other questions their majority will
not be so overwhelming.

    [Footnote 54: M. Sauzet was elected in preference to M.
    Odillon Barrot. Thiers resigned the Premiership on 14th
    October; in the new Ministry Soult was President of the
    Council, Guizot Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Duchatel
    Minister of the Interior.]




[Pageheading: DISAFFECTION IN FRANCE]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _11th November 1840._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and with
reference to your Majesty's memorandum of the 9th inst., he entreats
your Majesty not to believe that there exists at present in France
that danger of internal revolution and of external war which the
French Government, to serve its own diplomatic purposes, endeavours to
represent.

There is no doubt a large Party among the leading politicians in
France, who have long contemplated the establishment of a virtually,
if not actually, independent State in Egypt and Syria, under the
direct protection and influence of France, and that Party feel great
disappointment and resentment at finding their schemes in this respect
baffled. But that Party will not revenge themselves on the Four Powers
by making a revolution in France, and they are enlightened enough to
see that France cannot revenge herself by making war against the Four
Powers, who are much stronger than she is.

... But your Majesty may be assured that there is in France an immense
mass of persons, possessed of property, and engaged in pursuits of
industry, who are decidedly adverse to unnecessary war, and determined
to oppose revolution. And although those persons have not hitherto
come prominently forward, yet their voice would have made itself
heard, when the question of peace or unprovoked war came practically
to be discussed.

With regard to internal revolution, there is undoubtedly in France a
large floating mass of Republicans and Anarchists, ready at any moment
to make a disturbance if there was no strong power to resist them; but
the persons who would lose by convulsion are infinitely more numerous,
and the National Guard of Paris, consisting of nearly 60,000 men,
are chiefly persons of this description, and are understood to be
decidedly for internal order, and for external peace.

It is very natural that the French Government, after having failed to
extort concessions upon the Turkish Question, by menaces of foreign
war, should now endeavour to obtain those concessions, by appealing
to fears of another kind, and should say that such concessions are
necessary in order to prevent revolution in France; but Viscount
Palmerston would submit to your Majesty his deep conviction that
this appeal is not better founded than the other, and that a firm and
resolute perseverance on the part of the Four Powers, in the measures
which they have taken in hand, will effect a settlement of the affairs
of Turkey, which will afford great additional security for the future
peace of Europe, without producing in the meantime either war _with_
France, or revolution _in_ France.

France and the rest of Europe are entirely different now from what
they were in 1792. The French nation is as much interested now to
avoid further revolution, as it was interested then in ridding itself,
by any means, of the enormous and intolerable abuses which then
existed. France then imagined she had much to gain by foreign war;
France now knows she has everything to lose by foreign war.

Europe then (at least the Continental States) had also a strong desire
to get rid of innumerable abuses which pressed heavily upon the people
of all countries. Those abuses have now in general been removed; the
people in many parts of Germany have been admitted, more or less, to
a share in the management of their own affairs. A German feeling and
a spirit of nationality has sprung up among all the German people, and
the Germans, instead of receiving the French as Liberators, as many
of them did in 1792-1793, would now rise as one man to repel a hateful
invasion. Upon all these grounds Viscount Palmerston deems it his duty
to your Majesty to express his strong conviction that the appeals made
to your Majesty's good feelings by the King of the French, upon the
score of the danger of revolution in France, unless concessions are
made to the French Government, have no foundation in truth, and are
only exertions of skilful diplomacy.

Viscount Palmerston has to apologise to your Majesty for having
inadvertently written a part of this memorandum upon a half-sheet of
paper. And he would be glad if, without inconvenience to your Majesty,
he could be enabled to read to the Cabinet to-morrow the accompanying
despatches from Lord Granville.




[Pageheading: THE STATE OF FRANCE]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Palmerston._[55]

WINDSOR CASTLE, _11th November 1840._

The Queen has to acknowledge the receipt of Lord Palmerston's letter
of this morning, which she has read with great attention. The Queen
will just make a few observations upon various points in it, to which
she would wish to draw Lord Palmerston's attention. The Queen does so
with strict impartiality, having had ample opportunities of hearing
both sides of this intricate and highly-important question.

First of all, it strikes the Queen that, even if M. Thiers _did_ raise
the cry, which was so loud, for war in France (but which the Queen
cannot believe he _did_ to the extent Lord Palmerston does), that such
an excitement _once_ raised in a country like France, where the people
are more excitable than almost any other nation, it cannot be so
easily controuled and stopped again, and the Queen thinks this will be
seen in time.

Secondly, the Queen cannot either quite agree in Lord Palmerston's
observation, that the French Government state the danger of internal
revolution, if not supported, merely to extract further concessions
for Mehemet Ali. The Queen does not pretend to say that this danger is
not exaggerated, but depend upon it, a _certain_ degree of danger
does exist, and that the situation of the King of the French and
the present French Government is not an easy one. The majority,
too, cannot be depended upon, as many would vote against Odillon
Barrot,[56] who would _not_ vote on other occasions with the
Soult-Guizot Ministry.

Thirdly, the danger of war is also doubtless greatly exaggerated,
as also the numbers of the French troops. But Lord Palmerston must
recollect how very warlike the French are, and that if once roused,
they will not listen to the calm reasoning of those who wish for
peace, or think of the great risk they run of _losing_ by war, but
only of the glory and of revenging insult, as they call it.

Fourthly, the Queen sees the difficulty there exists at the present
moment of making any specific offer to France, but she must at
the same time repeat how _highly_ and _exceedingly_ important she
considers it that some sort of conciliatory agreement should be come
to with France, for she cannot believe that the appeals made to her
by the King of the French are only exertions of skilful diplomacy. The
Queen's earnest and only wish is peace, and a maintenance of friendly
relations with her allies, consistent with the honour and dignity
of her country. She does not think, however, that the last would be
compromised by attempts to soften the irritation still existing in
France, or by attempts to bring France back to her former position in
the Oriental Question.

She earnestly hopes that Lord Palmerston will consider this, will
reflect upon the importance of not driving France to extremities, and
of conciliatory measures, without showing fear (for our successes on
the coast of Syria show our power), or without yielding to threats.
France has been humbled, and France is in the wrong, but, therefore,
it is easier than if we had failed, to do something to bring matters
right again. The Queen has thus frankly stated her own opinion, which
she thought it right Lord Palmerston should know, and she is sure he
will see it is only dictated by an earnest desire to see _all_ as much
united as possible on this important subject.

    [Footnote 55: A copy of this letter was sent at the same time
    to Lord Melbourne.]

    [Footnote 56: The unsuccessful candidate for the Presidency of
    the Chamber.]




_Baron Stockmar to Viscount Melbourne._

_21st November 1840._

MY DEAR LORD,--I have just received Her Majesty's order to express
to you her great desire to have from this day the Prince's name
introduced into the Church Prayer. Her own words were: "that I should
press it with Lord Melbourne as the wish she had most at heart at this
moment." Ever yours most sincerely,

STOCKMAR.




[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD ON FRENCH AFFAIRS]


_The King of the Belgians to the Prince Albert._

[_Translated._]

LAEKEN, _26th November 1840._

... As to politics, I do not wish to say much to-day. Palmerston,
_rex_ and autocrat, is, for a Minister finding himself in such
fortunate circumstances, far _too irritable and violent_. One does not
understand the use of showing so much hatred and anger. What he says
about the _appeal to the personal feeling of the Queen, on the part
of the King of the French_, is childlike and malicious, for it has
_never_ existed.

The King was for many years the great friend of the Duke of Kent,
after whose death he remained a friend of Victoria. His relations with
the latter have, up to 1837, passed through very varied phases; she
was for a long time an object of hatred in the family, who had not
treated the Duke of Kent over-amicably, and a proof of this is the
fact that the Regent, from the year 1819, forbade the Duke his house
and presence--which was probably another nail in the Duke's coffin.
Many of these things are quite unknown to Victoria, or forgotten
by her. Still it is only fair not to forget the people who were her
friends before 1837; after that date there was a violent outbreak of
affection among people who in the year 1836 would still not go near
Victoria. October 1836, when he sat next her at dinner, was the
first time that Palmerston himself had ever seen Victoria except at a
distance. As you have the best means of knowing, the King has not even
dreamt of applying to Victoria.

As to danger, it was very great in September, on the occasion of the
_ouvrier_ riot--for a Paris mob fires at once, a thing which--Heaven
be thanked!--English mobs rarely do. Towards the end of October, when
Thiers withdrew, there was a possibility of a revolution, and it was
only the fear of people of wealth that kept them together, and drew
them towards Guizot.

A revolution, at once democratic and bellicose, could not but become
most dangerous. That was on the cards, and only a fairly fortunate
combination of circumstances saved matters. The King and my poor
mother-in-law were terribly _low_, _on both occasions_, and I confess
that I looked everyday with the greatest anxiety for the news. If the
poor King had been murdered, or even if he were now to be murdered,
what danger, what confusion would follow! All these things were met by
Palmerston with the excessively _nonchalante_ declaration, _it was not
so, and it is not so_! Those are absolutely baseless assertions, and
totally valueless. At least I could estimate the danger as well as he
and Bulwer--and, indeed, it was an anxious crisis. I should think the
Revolution of 1790 _et ce qui s'en est suivi_ had done a brisk enough
business in Europe, and to risk a new one of the same kind would
really be somewhat scandalous.

What, however, may be the future fruit of the seed of Palmerston's
sowing, we do not in the least know as yet; it may, however, prove
sufficiently full of misfortune for the future of innocent people.
The Eastern affairs will be put on an intelligible footing only when,
after these differences with Mehemet Ali, something is done for
the poor Porte, which is now so much out of repair. Otherwise there
remains a little place which is called Sebastopol, and from which, as
the wind is almost constantly favourable, one can get very quickly
to Constantinople--and Constantinople is always the one place which
exercises the greatest influence, and all the more because the ducats
come from that quarter, with results which the marked economy of
England is hardly likely to effect....

Victoria has borne herself bravely and properly in the matter, and
_deserves to be greatly praised_....




[Pageheading: BIRTH OF THE PRINCESS ROYAL]


_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _30th November 1840._

MY MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--I have been longing to write to you ever
since we got the _joyful_ tidings,[57] but I would not do so before
the nine days were at an end. Now that they are over, I hope as you
are, thank God, so well, I may venture a few lines to express _a part_
of my feelings, and to wish you joy on the happy birth of your dear
little girl. I need not tell you the _deep, deep_ share I took in this
most _happy event_, and all I felt for you, for dear Albert, when I
heard of it, and since we last met. You know my affection for you,
and I will not trouble you with the repetition of what you know. All
I will say is that I thanked God with all my heart, and as I have
scarcely thanked Him for any other favour....

    [Footnote 57: The Princess Royal, afterwards the Empress
    Frederick of Germany, was born 21st November 1840.]




[Pageheading: SETTLEMENT OF EASTERN QUESTION]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_15th December 1840._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Many thanks for your kind little letter of the
10th from Ardenne. I am very prosperous, walking about the house like
myself again, and we go to Windsor on the 22nd or 23rd, which will
quite set me up. I am _very_ prudent and careful, you may _rely_ upon
it. Your little grand-niece is most flourishing; she gains daily in
health, strength and, I may add, beauty; I think she will be very like
her dearest father; she grows amazingly; I shall be proud to present
her to you.

The _dénouement_ of the Oriental affair is most fortunate, is it
not?[58]

I see Stockmar often, who is very kind about me and the Princess
Royal....

Albert sends his affectionate love, and pray believe me always, your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 58: On the 3rd of November St Jean d'Acre was
    captured by the allied fleet, Admiral Sir Robert Stopford
    commanding the British contingent; the battle is said to have
    been the first to test the advantages of steam. Admiral Napier
    proceeded to Alexandria, and threatened bombardment, unless
    the Pasha came to terms. On 25th November a Convention was
    signed, by which Mehemet Ali resigned his claims to Syria, and
    bound himself to restore the Ottoman Fleet, while the Powers
    undertook to procure for him undisturbed possession of the
    Pashalik of Egypt.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _26th December 1840._

... I can well understand that you feel quite astonished at finding
yourself within a year of your marriage a very respectable mother of
a nice little girl, but let us thank Heaven that it is so. Any illness
to which, unfortunately, we poor human creatures are very subject,
would almost have kept you longer in bed, and make you longer weak and
uncomfortable, than an event which in your position as Sovereign is of
a very great importance.

Because there is no doubt that a Sovereign without heirs direct, or
brothers and sisters, which by their attachment may stand in lieu of
them, is much to be pitied, viz., Queen Anne's later years. Moreover,
children of our own, besides the affection which one feels for them,
have also for their parents sentiments which one rarely obtains from
strangers. I flatter myself therefore that you will be a delighted and
delightful _Maman au milieu d'une belle et nombreuse famille_....




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER X


At the beginning of the year the Ministry were confronted with
monetary difficulties and bad trade; their special weakness in
finance, contrasted with Sir Robert Peel's great ability, in addition
to their many reverses, indicated that a change was at hand; and
confidential communications were, with Lord Melbourne's full approval,
opened up by the Prince with Sir Robert Peel, to avert the recurrence
of a Bedchamber dispute. The Ministry were defeated on their Budget,
but did not resign. A vote of want of confidence was then carried
against them by a majority of one, and Parliament was dissolved; the
Ministers appealing to the country on the cry of a fixed duty on corn.
The Conservative and Protectionist victory was a decisive one,
the most significant successes being in the city of London,
Northumberland, and the West Riding. Somewhat improving their position
in Scotland and Ireland, and just holding their own in the English
boroughs, the Whigs were absolutely overwhelmed in the counties, and
in the result three hundred and sixty-eight Conservatives and only two
hundred and ninety-two Liberals were returned. The modern practice of
resigning before meeting Parliament had not then been introduced, and
the Ministry was defeated in both Houses on Amendments to the Address,
the Duke of Wellington taking the opportunity of eulogising Lord
Melbourne's great services to the Queen. A powerful Protectionist
Ministry was formed by Sir Robert Peel, including the Duke of
Wellington, Lord Aberdeen, Sir James Graham, and Lord Lyndhurst.

Great national rejoicings took place when, on the 9th of November, a
male heir to the throne, now His Majesty King Edward VII., was born.

In France the bitter feeling against England, arising out of the
Syrian expedition, still continued, but Thiers' supersession by the
more pacific Guizot, and the satisfaction with which both the latter
and his Sovereign regarded the displacement of Palmerston by Aberdeen,
began to lead to a better _entente_. The scheme of fortifying Paris
continued, however, to be debated, while the Orleanist family were
still the subjects of futile _attentats_.

Spain was disturbed, the question of the guardianship of the young
Queen giving rise to dissension: insurrections in the interests of the
Queen-mother took place at Pampeluna and Vittoria, and her pension was
suspended by Espartero, the Regent.

In the east, Mehemet Ali surrendered the whole of the Turkish fleet,
and he was subsequently guaranteed the hereditary Pashalik of Egypt
by the four European Powers who had intervened in the affairs of the
Levant.

In Afghanistan, an insurrection broke out, and Sir Alexander Burnes
was murdered; our envoy at Cabul, Sir William Macnaghten, in an
unfortunate moment entered into negotiations with Akbar Khan, a son
of Dost Mahommed, who treacherously assassinated him. Somewhat
humiliating terms were arranged, and the English force of 4,000
soldiers, with 12,000 camp-followers, proceeded to withdraw from
Cabul, harassed by the enemy; after endless casualties, General
Elphinstone, who was in command, with the women and children, became
captives, and one man alone, of the 16,000--Dr Brydon--reached
Jellalabad to tell the tale.

In China, operations were continued, Sir Henry Pottinger superseding
Captain Elliot, and Canton soon lying at the mercy of the British
arms; the new Superintendent co-operated with Sir Hugh Gough and
Admiral Sir William Parker, in the capture of Amoy, Chusan, Chintu,
and Ningpo.

In America, the union of the two Canadas was carried into effect, but
a sharp dispute with the United States arose out of the Upper Canada
disturbances of 1837. Some Canadian loyalists had then resented the
interference of a few individual Americans in favour of the rebels,
and an American named Durfee had been killed. One M'Leod, a British
subject, was now arrested in the State of New York, on a charge of
having been concerned in the affray. He was acquitted, reprisals were
made by Canadians, and international feeling was for a time highly
acute.


Much interest naturally attaches to Lord Melbourne's continued
correspondence with the Queen, after the change of Government. Baron
Stockmar's remonstrance on the subject shows that he misunderstood the
character of the correspondence, and over-estimated its momentousness.

These letters dealt chiefly with social and personal matters, and
although full of interest from the light which they throw on Lord
Melbourne's relations with the Queen, they show him to have behaved
with scrupulous honour and delicacy, and to have tried to augment,
rather than undermine, Peel's growing influence with the Queen
and Prince. There are comparatively few of Peel's letters in the
collection. He wrote rarely at first, and only on strictly official
matters. But before long his great natural reserve was broken through,
and his intercourse with the Prince, to whom his character was
particularly sympathetic, became very close and intimate.

Of all the English Ministers with whom the Prince was brought in
contact, it is known that he preferred the stately and upright
Commoner, who certainly, of all English Ministers, estimated and
appreciated the Prince's character most truly and clearly.



CHAPTER X

1841


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_5th January 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I have to thank you for two very kind letters, of
the 26th December and 1st January, and for all your very kind and good
wishes. I am sorry to hear you have all been plagued with colds; we
have as yet escaped them, and I trust will continue to do so. I think,
dearest Uncle, you cannot _really_ wish me to be the "Mamma d'une
_nombreuse_ famille," for I think you will see with me the great
inconvenience a _large_ family would be to us all, and particularly to
the country, independent of the hardship and inconvenience to myself;
men never think, at least seldom think, what a hard task it is for us
women to go through this _very often_. God's will be done, and if He
decrees that we are to have a great number of children, why we must
try to bring them up as useful and exemplary members of society. Our
young lady flourishes exceedingly, and I hope the Van de Weyers (who
have been here for three days), who have seen her twice, will give you
a favourable description of her. I think you would be amused to see
Albert dancing her in his arms; he makes a capital nurse (which I do
not, and she is much too heavy for me to carry), and she already seems
so happy to go to him.

The christening will be at Buckingham Palace on the 10th of February,
our dear marriage-day.

Affairs are certainly still precarious, but I feel confident all will
come right....

Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _8th January 1841._

... I trust also that affairs will come right; what is to be feared
is the _chapter of accidents_. Your name bears glorious fruits in all
climes; this globe will soon be too small for you, and something must
be done to get at the other planets....




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S EDUCATION]


_Memorandum--Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _15th January 1841._

Lord Melbourne said, "The Prince is bored with the sameness of his
chess every evening. He would like to bring literary and scientific
people about the Court, vary the society, and infuse a more useful
tendency into it. The Queen however has no fancy to encourage such
people. This arises from a feeling on her part that her education has
not fitted her to take part in such conversation; she would not like
conversation to be going on in which she could not take her fair
share, and she is far too open and candid in her nature to pretend to
one atom more knowledge than she really possesses on such subjects;
and yet, as the world goes, she would, as any girl, have been
considered accomplished, for she speaks German well and writes it;
understands Italian, speaks French fluently, and writes it with great
elegance. In addition to this old Davys instilled some Latin into her
during his tutorship. The rest of her education she owes to her own
natural shrewdness and quickness, and this perhaps has not been the
proper education for one who was to wear the Crown of England.

"The Queen is very proud of the Prince's utter indifference to the
attractions of all ladies. I told Her Majesty that these were early
days to boast, which made her rather indignant. I think she is a
little jealous of his talking much even to men."




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S SPEECH]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_19th January 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has just
received your Majesty's letter. Lord Melbourne is very sorry not
to come down to Windsor, but he really thinks that his absence from
London at this moment might be prejudicial.

Lord Melbourne will do his utmost to have the Speech worded in the
most calm manner, and so as in no respect to offend or irritate any
feelings. Some mention of the good conduct and gallantry of the Navy
there must be--to omit it would be injurious and disheartening--but as
to any expressions complimentary to France or expressive of regret
at our separation from it, it will be hardly possible to introduce
anything of that nature.[1] It is quite unusual in our Speeches from
the Throne to express either approbation or disapprobation of the
conduct of foreign nations and foreign Governments. It is surprising
how very seldom it has been done, and the wisdom and prudence of
abstaining from it is very manifest. It would be giving an opinion
upon that which does not belong to us. Anything which would have the
effect of producing satisfaction in France must be of an apologetic
character, which there is no ground for, and for which neither the
Government nor the country is prepared.

The best course will be a total reserve upon this head, certainly
abstaining from anything that can be in the slightest degree
offensive.

    [Footnote 1: France was not mentioned, though the Convention
    with the other Powers, and the naval operations in conjunction
    with Austria, were referred to.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_22nd January 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty.

Lord Melbourne will be most happy to wait upon your Majesty on
Saturday and Sunday.

Lord Melbourne is very sorry that your Majesty is compelled to come to
London contrary to your inclinations; but Lord Melbourne much rejoices
that your Majesty expresses that reluctance, as there is no surer
sign of complete happiness and contentment in the married life than a
desire to remain quietly in the country, and there is nothing on the
earth Lord Melbourne desires more anxiously than the assurance of your
Majesty's happiness.




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S INFANCY]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _22nd January 1841._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I thank you very sincerely for your kind letter
of the 19th, which I hasten to answer. I should not have bored you by
my presence, but the act of the christening is, in my eyes, a sort of
closing of the first cyclus of your dear life. I was shooting at the
late Lord Craven's in Berkshire, when I received the messenger who
brought me the horrifying news of your poor father's deadly illness. I
hastened in bitter cold weather to Sidmouth, about two days before his
death. His affairs were so much deranged that your Mother would have
had no means even of leaving Sidmouth if I had not taken all this
under my care and management. That dreary journey, undertaken, I
think, on the 26th of January, in bitter cold and damp weather, I
shall not easily forget. I looked very sharp after the poor little
baby, then about eight months old. Arrived in London we were very
unkindly treated by George IV., _whose great wish was to get you and
your Mamma out of the country_, and I must say without my assistance
you could _not_ have remained.... I state these facts, because it is
useful to remember through what _difficulties_ and _hardships_ one
had to struggle. You will also remember that though there existed
the _possibility_ of your eventually succeeding to the Crown, that
possibility was very doubtful, the then Duchess of Clarence having
been confined after your Mother, and there being every reason to think
that, though poor little Princess Elizabeth did not live more than
some months, other children might appear.[2]

It was a long time from 1820 to 1837! We got over it, however, and, as
far as you are concerned, God be praised! safely and happily. You are
married, with every prospect of many happy years to come, and your
happiness is _crowned_, and _consolidated_, as it were, by the birth
of the dear little lady. Having from motives of discretion, perhaps
_carried even too far_, not assisted at your coming to the throne,
nor at your Coronation, nor afterwards at your marriage, I wished to
assist at the christening of the little Princess, an event which is of
great importance....

    [Footnote 2: Two children were born to the Duke and Duchess of
    Clarence--Charlotte Augusta Louisa, born and died 29th March
    1819, and Elizabeth Georgina Adelaide, born 10th December
    1820, and died 4th March 1821.]




_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

CARLTON TERRACE, _1st February 1841._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and in
submitting this letter from Earl Granville, which coupled with the
despatches from Sir Robert Stopford virtually show that the Turkish
Question is brought to a close, begs most humbly to congratulate your
Majesty upon this rapid and peaceful settlement of a matter which at
different periods has assumed appearances so threatening to the peace
of Europe.[3]

    [Footnote 3: See _ante_, pp. 252, 254.
      (Ch. IX, Footnote 58; Intro. Note to Ch. X)]




[Pageheading: ILLNESS OF DUKE OF WELLINGTON]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_2nd February 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Lord
Melbourne will be happy to wait upon your Majesty on Thursday,
Saturday and Sunday, but he finds that there is to be a Cabinet dinner
to-morrow.

Lord Melbourne will speak to Lord Palmerston about Lord John Russell.

Lord Melbourne does not see the name of the Archbishop of Canterbury
as a subscriber to this "Parker" Society, and if your Majesty will
give him leave, he will ask him about it before he gives your Majesty
an answer. It is in some degree a party measure, and levelled against
these new Oxford doctrines. The proposal is to republish the works of
the older divines up to the time of the death of Queen Elizabeth. Up
to that period the doctrines of the Church of England were decidedly
Calvinistic. During the reign of James II.,[4] and particularly after
the Synod of Dort (1618-1619), the English clergy very generally
adopted _Arminian_ opinions.

It is proposed to republish the works of the divines who wrote during
the first period, and to stop short when they come to the second.
There is meaning in this. But, after all, the object is not a bad one,
and it may not be worth while to consider it so closely.

    [Footnote 4: Lord Melbourne must have meant James I.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_5th February 1841 (6 o'clock)._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is very
sorry to have to acquaint your Majesty that the Duke of Wellington was
taken ill in the House of Lords this evening with a seizure, probably
paralytic, and of the same nature with those which he has had before.
Lord Brougham, who was standing opposite to the Duke and addressing
the House, observed the Duke's face to be drawn and distorted, and
soon afterwards the Duke rose from his seat and walked staggeringly
towards the door. He walked down the gallery, supported on each side,
but never spoke. A medical man was procured to attend him; he was
placed in his carriage and driven home....




[Pageheading: THE UNITED STATES]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_6th March 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that the remainder of the Navy Estimates, and
nearly the whole of the Army Estimates, were voted last night without
any serious opposition. Indeed the chief fault found with the Army
Estimates was that they are not large enough.

Sir Robert Peel made a remarkable speech. Adverting to the present
state of our affairs with the United States,[5] he said that much
as he disliked war, yet if the honour or interests of the country
required it, he should sink all internal differences, and give his
best support to the Government of his country.

This declaration was received with loud cheers. It must be considered
as very creditable to Sir Robert Peel.

    [Footnote 5: _See_ Introductory Note, _ante_, p. 254.
      (Intro Note to Ch. X)]




[Pageheading: CHINA]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _10th April 1841._

Viscount Palmerston presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
has the honour to submit the accompanying letters, which he received
yesterday, about the operations in China, and which have just
been returned to him by Viscount Melbourne, whose letter he also
transmits.[6]

Viscount Palmerston has felt greatly mortified and disappointed at
this result of the expedition to China, and he much fears that the
sequel of the negotiation, which was to follow the conclusion of these
preliminary conditions, will not tend to render the arrangement less
objectionable. Captain Elliot seems to have wholly disregarded the
instructions which had been sent to him, and even when, by the entire
success of the operations of the Fleet, he was in a condition to
dictate his own terms, he seems to have agreed to very inadequate
conditions.[7] The amount of compensation for the opium surrendered
falls short of the value of that opium, and nothing has been obtained
for the expenses of the expedition, nor for the debts of the bankrupt
Hong[8] merchants. The securities which the plenipotentiaries were
expressly ordered to obtain for British residents in China have been
abandoned; and the Island of Chusan which they were specifically
informed was to be retained till the whole of the pecuniary
compensation should have been paid, has been hastily and discreditably
evacuated. Even the cession of Hong Kong has been coupled with a
condition about the payment of duties, which would render that island
not a possession of the British Crown, but, like Macao, a settlement
held by sufferance in the territory of the Crown of China.

Viscount Palmerston deems it his duty in laying these papers before
your Majesty, to state some few of the objections which he feels to
the arrangement, but the Cabinet will have to consider, as soon as
they meet after the Recess, what advice they may wish humbly to tender
to your Majesty upon these important matters. There is no doubt,
however, that much has been accomplished, but it is very mortifying
to find that other things which the plenipotentiaries were ordered
to obtain, and which the force placed at their command was amply
sufficient to enable them to accomplish, have not been attained.

Viscount Palmerston has sent a small map of the Canton River, which
your Majesty may like to keep for future reference.

    [Footnote 6: Captain Elliot, after capturing the Chinese
    position at the mouth of Canton River, concluded a preliminary
    treaty with the Chinese Government, which did not satisfy the
    Chinese, and which was strongly disapproved of by the English
    Ministry, as containing no mention of the opium traffic,
    which had been the cause of all the difficulties; Elliot was
    accordingly recalled, and succeeded by Sir Henry Pottinger.]

    [Footnote 7: They were the cession of Hong-Kong, and payment
    of an indemnity of 6,000,000 dollars to Great Britain,
    with provision for commercial facilities and collection of
    customs.]

    [Footnote 8: The native Canton merchants,--Hong here probably
    meaning a "row of houses," a "street." Hong Kong (Hiang Kiang)
    means the "fragrant lagoon."]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_13th April 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I thank you much for your kind letter of the 9th,
received yesterday. I have just heard from Stockmar (who, I hope,
reported favourably of us all) that your Ministry is at _last_
settled, of which I wish you joy. I think, dear Uncle, that you would
find the East not only as "absurd" as the West, but very barbarous,
cruel, and dangerous into the bargain.

The Chinese business vexes us much, and Palmerston is deeply mortified
at it. _All_ we wanted might have been got, if it had not been for
the unaccountably strange conduct of Charles Elliot (_not Admiral_
Elliot,[9] for _he_ was obliged to come away from ill-health), who
completely disobeyed his instructions and _tried_ to get the _lowest_
terms he could.... The attack and storming of the Chorempee Forts on
the 7th of January was very gallantly done by the Marines, and immense
destruction of the Chinese took place.[10] The accounts of the cruelty
of the Chinese to one another are horrible. Albert is so much amused
at my having got the Island of Hong Kong, and we think Victoria ought
to be called Princess of Hong Kong in addition to Princess Royal.

She drives out every day in a close carriage with the window open,
since she has been here, which does her worlds of good, and she is to
have a _walk_ to-day.

Stockmar writes me word that Charlotte[11] is quite beautiful. _I_ am
very jealous.

I think Vecto quite right not to travel without Nemours; for it would
look just as if she was unhappy, and ran to her parents for help. I
am sure _if_ Albert ever should be away (which, however, _will_ and
_shall never_ happen, for I would go with him even if he was to go
to the _North Pole_), I should never think of travelling; but I can't
make mamma understand this. Now farewell. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 9: They were both cousins of Lord Minto, the First
    Lord of the Admiralty.]

    [Footnote 10: Commodore Bremer very speedily reduced some of
    the forts, but his further operations were stopped.]

    [Footnote 11: Daughter of King Leopold, who married in
    1857 the Archduke Ferdinand of Austria (afterwards Emperor
    Maximilian of Mexico).]




[Pageheading: LORD CARDIGAN]

[Pageheading: ARMY DISCIPLINE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_24th April 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Mr
Labouchere[12] has desired that the five-pound piece which is about
to be issued from the Mint should be submitted for your Majesty's
inspection and approbation.

We have had under our consideration at the Cabinet the unfortunate
subject of the conduct of Lord Cardigan.[13] The public feeling upon
it is very strong, and it is almost certain that a Motion will be made
in the House of Commons for an Address praying your Majesty to remove
him from the command of his regiment. Such a Motion, if made, there is
very little chance of resisting with success, and nothing is more to
be apprehended and deprecated than such an interference of the House
of Commons with the interior discipline and government of the Army.
It was also felt that the general order issued by the Horse Guards
was not sufficient to meet the case, and in these circumstances it was
thought proper that Lord Melbourne should see Lord Hill, and should
express to him the opinion of the Cabinet, that it was necessary that
he should advise your Majesty to take such measures as should have the
effect of removing Lord Cardigan from the command of the 11th Hussars.
The repeated acts of imprudence of which Lord Cardigan has been
guilty, and the repeated censures which he has drawn down upon
himself, form a ground amply sufficient for such a proceeding, and
indeed seem imperiously to demand it.[14]

Lord Melbourne has seen Lord Hill and made to him this communication,
and has left it for his consideration. Lord Hill is deeply chagrined
and annoyed, but will consider the matter and confer again with Lord
Melbourne upon it to-morrow.

    [Footnote 12: President of the Board of Trade, afterwards
    created Lord Taunton.]

    [Footnote 13: "Within the space of a single twelvemonth, one
    of his [Lord Cardigan's] captains was cashiered for writing
    him a challenge; he sent a coarse and insulting verbal message
    to another, and then punished him with prolonged arrest,
    because he respectfully refused to shake hands with the
    officer who had been employed to convey the affront; he fought
    a duel with a lieutenant who had left the corps, and shot him
    through the body; and he flogged a soldier on Sunday, between
    the Services, on the very spot where, half an hour before, the
    man's comrades had been mustered for public worship."--SIR G.
    TREVELYAN, _Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay_, chap. viii.]

    [Footnote 14: In February he had been acquitted on technical
    grounds by the House of Lords of shooting a Captain Harvey
    Garnett Phipps Tuckett. He had accused Tuckett of being the
    author of letters which had appeared in the papers reflecting
    on his character; a duel on Wimbledon Common followed, and
    Tuckett was wounded. The evidence, consisting in part of a
    visiting card, showed that a Captain Harvey Tuckett had
    been wounded, which was held to be insufficient evidence of
    identity.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_25th April 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is most
anxious upon all subjects to be put in possession of Your Majesty's
full and entire opinions. It is true that this question may materially
affect the discipline of the Army, by subjecting the interior
management of regiments to be brought continually under the inspection
and control of the House of Commons upon complaints of officers
against their superiors, or even of private men against the officers.

The danger of the whole of Lord Cardigan's proceedings has been lest
a precedent of this nature should arise out of them. The question is
whether it is not more prudent to prevent a question being brought
forward in the House of Commons, than to wait for it with the
certainty of being obliged to yield to it or of being overpowered by
it. But of course this cannot be done unless it is consistent with
justice and with the usage and prestige of the Service.

Lord Melbourne has desired the Cabinet Ministers to assemble here
to-day at four o'clock, in order to consider the subject. Lord
Melbourne has seen Lord Hill again this morning, and Lord Hill has
seen and consulted the Duke of Wellington, who has stated his opinion
very fully.

The opinion of the Duke is that the Punishment on Sunday was a great
impropriety and indiscretion upon the part of Lord Cardigan, but not a
Military offence, nor a breach of the Mutiny Act or of the Articles of
War; that it called for the censure of the Commander-in-Chief, which
censure was pronounced by the General Order upon which the Duke was
consulted before it was issued, and that according to the usage of the
Service no further step can be taken by the Military Authorities. This
opinion Lord Melbourne will submit to-day to the Cabinet Ministers.

Lord Melbourne perceives that he has unintentionally written upon
two sheets of paper, which he hopes will cause your Majesty no
inconvenience.




[Pageheading: THE NOTTINGHAM ELECTION]


_Lord Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _28th April 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has
himself seen the result of the election at Nottingham[15] without the
least surprise, from his knowledge of the place and his observation of
the circumstances of the contest. What John Russell reported to your
Majesty was the opinion of those who act for us in that place, but as
soon as Lord Melbourne saw that there was a disposition upon the part
of the violent party, Radicals, Chartists, and what not, to support
the Tory candidate, he knew that the contest was formidable and
dubious. The Tory party is very strong, naturally, at Nottingham,
and if it received any accession of strength, was almost certain to
prevail. This combination, or rather this accession of one party to
the Tories, which has taken place at Nottingham, is very likely, and
in Lord Melbourne's opinion almost certain, to take place in many
other parts of the country in the case of a general election, and
forms very serious matter for consideration as to the prudence of
taking such a step as a dissolution of the Parliament.

Lord Melbourne will wait upon your Majesty after the Levée. It
signifies not how late, as there is no House of Lords.

    [Footnote 15: Where Mr Walter, a Tory, was elected with a
    majority of 238.]




[Pageheading: THE BUDGET]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _1st May 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that Mr Baring yesterday brought forward the
Budget in a remarkably clear and forcible speech.

The changes in the duties on Sugar and Timber,[16] and the
announcement made by Lord John Russell of a proposal for a fixed duty
on Corn, seemed to surprise and irritate the Opposition.

Sir Robert Peel refused to give any opinion on these propositions, and
satisfied himself with attacking the Government on the state of the
finances.

The supporters of the Government were greatly pleased with Mr Baring's
plan, and loud in their cheers.

It is the general opinion that Lord Stanley will not proceed with his
Bill,[17] and there seems little doubt of this fact.

But the two parties are now evenly balanced, and the absence or
defection of some two or three of the Ministerial party may at any
time leave the Government in a minority.

    [Footnote 16: The proposals were to increase the duty on
    colonial timber from 10_s._ to 20_s._ a load, reducing it on
    foreign timber from 55_s._ to 50_s._, to leave the duty on
    colonial sugar unloaded at 24_s._ a cwt., reducing that on
    foreign sugar from 63_s._ to 36_s._ a cwt.]

    [Footnote 17: On Irish Registration.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_3rd May 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. We decided at
the Cabinet on Friday that we could not sanction the agreement which
Captain Elliot has probably by this time concluded with the Government
of China, but that it would be necessary to demand a larger amount of
indemnity for the past injury, and also a more complete security for
our trade in future. For this purpose it was determined to send out
instructions, in case the armament should not have left the Chinese
coasts and have been dispersed, to reoccupy the Island of Chusan,[18]
a measure which appears to have had a great effect upon the minds
of the Chinese Government. It was also determined to recall Captain
Elliot, and to send out as soon as possible another officer with
full instructions from hence as to the views and intentions of your
Majesty's Government. Sir Henry Pottinger,[19] an officer in the East
India Company's Service, much distinguished in the recent operations
in Afghanistan, is designated with your Majesty's approbation for this
service, which he has signified his willingness to undertake. It was
also thought that it would be proper to entrust Lord Auckland[20]
with general discretionary powers as to the further conduct of the
expedition. These determinations Lord Melbourne hopes that your
Majesty will approve.

Lord John Russell informed Lord Melbourne yesterday that he knew that
it was not the intention of the Opposition to press Lord Stanley's
Bill; but it is not to be expected in the present position of affairs
that they will not determine upon taking some decisive and united
measure in advance.

In the present state of public measures and of public feeling, when
debate may arise at any moment, it would not be fitting for Lord
Melbourne to absent himself on any sitting day from the House of
Lords. But unless there should be anything so urgent as to prevent
him, he will come down after the House on Tuesday evening and stay
until Thursday morning.

Fanny is highly delighted and immeasurably grateful for your Majesty's
offer of the Lodge in Richmond Park, and most desirous to avail
herself of your Majesty's kindness, and so is Jocelyn. Lord Melbourne
has little doubt that they will thankfully accept it.[21]

    [Footnote 18: The Island of Chusan, off the coast of China,
    had been occupied in July 1840 as a base of operations, but
    evacuated by Elliot in 1841. It was retaken in September 1841,
    after Elliot's recall, by Sir Henry Pottinger.]

    [Footnote 19: He had served in the Mahratta War, and been
    political agent in Scinde.]

    [Footnote 20: Governor-General of India.]

    [Footnote 21: Lady Fanny Cowper, Lord Melbourne's niece, was
    married to Lord Jocelyn on 27th April.]




[Pageheading: CHRISTENING OF COMTE DE PARIS]


_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

PARIS, _3rd May 1841._

MY BELOVED VICTORIA,--As you know surely already, the day of yesterday
went off very well. The christening[22] was very splendid, the weather
beautiful, and everything extremely well managed.... The arrival
at Notre-Dame, and the _coup d'[oe]il_ of the old church, all hung
interiorly with crimson velvet draperies and trophies of flags, was
very splendid. There was in the church three rows _de tribunes_ all
full of well-dressed people. _Les grands corps de l'État étaient
rangés de chaque côté et dans le ch[oe]ur; l'Autel était placé au
centre de l'église. Les cardinaux et tout le clergé étaient alentour._
When my father arrived, the Archbishop of Paris received him at the
door of the church, and we all walked in state. My father _ouvrait la
marche_ with the Queen. _Prie-dieu_ and chairs were disposed for us
_en demi-cercle_ before the altar, or rather before the baptismal
font, which was placed in front of it, in the very middle of the
Church. My father and mother stood in the centre of the row near each
other. Your uncle, Chartres, and all the Princes followed on the
side of my father, and the princesses on the side of my mother. Paris
remained with Hélène till the moment of the christening. When the
ceremony began he advanced near the font with my father and mother
(sponsors), and was taken up in the arms of his nurse. After the
christening a Mass and _Te Deum_ were read, and when we came back to
the Tuileries the _corps municipal_ brought the sword which the City
of Paris has given to the Comte de Paris....

    [Footnote 22: Of the Comte de Paris, at this time nearly three
    years old, son of the Duc d'Orléans.]




[Pageheading: THE SUGAR DUTIES]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _4th May 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that Lord Stanley yesterday postponed his Bill
for a fortnight, which at this period of the year is equivalent to its
abandonment.

On the other hand, Lord Sandon gave a notice for Friday for a
Resolution on Sugar Duties.

If, as is probable, this Motion is made as a party movement, it is
probable that, with the addition of those on the Ministerial side who
have an interest in the West Indies, the Motion will be successful.

The whole scheme of finance for the year will thus be overturned.

The Tory party seem to expect a dissolution of Parliament, but your
Majesty's advisers will hardly be able to recommend to your Majesty
such a step.

The cry against the Poor Law is sure to be taken up by the worst
politicians of the Tory party, and, as at Nottingham, may be
successful against that most useful law.

The friends of Government who represent counties will be taunted with
the proposal to alter the Corn Law.

Bribery is sure to be resorted to beyond anything yet seen.

A defeat of the Ministry on a dissolution would be final and
irreparable.

On the other hand, their successors in the Government would have to
provide for the excess in the expenditure pledged against the best
measures that could be resorted to for the purpose. It would be a
difficulty of their own seeking, and their want of candour and justice
to their opponents would be the cause of their own embarrassments.

The moment is a very important one, and the consequences of the vote
of Friday, or probably Monday, cannot fail to be serious.




[Pageheading: A MINISTERIAL CRISIS]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

_"The Ministry in jeopardy." (Heading in the Prince Albert's hand.)_

WINDSOR CASTLE, _4th May 1841._

Lord Melbourne came down from town after the House of Lords. I went
with him to his room for an hour after the Queen had retired. He said
the main struggle would take place on the Sugar Duties on Friday. His
impression was that the Government would be beat, and he must then
decide whether to go out or dissolve. He leaned to the former. I said,
"I trusted he would not dissolve unless he thought there was some
prospect of increasing his strength, and begged him to remember what
was done would not be considered the act of the Government but that of
himself and the Queen, and that he individually would be held as the
responsible person."

He said he had not written to the Queen to prepare H.M. for coming
events and the course that it would be incumbent upon her to take, for
he felt it extremely difficult and delicate, especially as to the use
she should make of the Prince, and of her mode of communication when
she required it with Lord Melbourne. He thought she ought never to ask
his advice direct, but if she required his opinion there would be no
objection to her obtaining it through the Prince.

He said H.M. had relied so implicitly upon him upon all affairs, that
he felt that she required in this emergency advice upon almost every
subject. That he would tell H.M. that she must carefully abstain from
playing the same part she did, again, on Sir R. Peel's attempt to form
a Ministry, for that nothing but the forbearance of the Tories had
enabled himself and his colleagues to support H.M. at that time. He
feared Peel's doggedness and pertinacity might make him insist, as a
point of honour, on having all discretion granted to him in regard
to the removal of Ladies. I told him of the Prince's suggestion that
before the Queen saw Sir R. Peel some negotiation might be entered
into with Sir Robert, so that the subject might be avoided by mutual
consent, the terms of which might be that Sir Robert should give up
his demand to extort the principle. The Queen, on the other hand,
should require the resignation of those Ladies objected to by Sir
Robert. Lord Melbourne said, however, that the Prince must not have
personal communication with Sir Robert on this subject, but he thought
that I might through the medium of a common friend.




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE'S ADVICE]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _5th May 1841._

Saw Lord Melbourne after his interview this morning with the Queen. He
says Her Majesty was perfectly calm and reasonable, and seemed quite
prepared for the resignation of the Government. He said she was
prepared to give way upon the Ladies if required, but much wished
that that point might be previously settled by negotiation with Sir R.
Peel, to avoid any discussion or difference. Lord Melbourne thinks I
might do this. He would also like Peel to be cautioned not to press
Her Majesty to decide hastily, but to give Her Majesty time, and that
he should feel that if he acted fairly he would be met in the same
spirit by the Queen.

With regard to future communication with Lord Melbourne, the Queen
said she did not mean that a change should exclude her from Lord
Melbourne's society, and when Lord Melbourne said that in society Her
Majesty could not procure Lord Melbourne's opinion upon any subject,
and suggested that that should be obtained through the Prince, Her
Majesty said that that could pass in writing under cover to me, but
that she must communicate direct.

The Queen, he says, leans to sending for the Duke of Wellington. Lord
Melbourne advised that Her Majesty should make up her mind at once to
send for Sir Robert. He told me that it would not be without precedent
to send for both at once; this it appears to me would obviate every
objection. The Queen, he thinks, has a perfect right to exercise her
judgment upon the selection of all persons recommended to Her Majesty
for Household appointments, both as to liking, but chiefly as to their
character and as to the character of the husband or wife of the person
selected. He would advise the Queen to adopt the course which King
William did with Lord Melbourne in 1835, viz. desiring Lord Melbourne,
before His Majesty approved of any appointments, to send a list of
those proposed even to the members of every Board, and the King having
them all before him expressed his objections to certain persons, which
Lord Melbourne yielded to.

Told Lord Melbourne that the Prince wished him to impress upon the
Queen's mind not to act upon the approaching crisis without the
Prince, because she would not be able to go through difficulties by
herself, and the Prince would not be able to help her when he was
ignorant of the considerations which had influenced her actions. He
would wish Lord Melbourne when with the Queen to call in the Prince,
in order that they might both be set right upon Lord Melbourne's
opinions, that he might express in the presence of each other his
views, in order that he should not convey different impressions by
speaking to them separately, so that _they_ might act in concert.

The Prince says the Queen always sees what is right at a glance, but
if her feelings run contrary she avoids the Prince's arguments, which
she feels sure agree with her own, and seeks arguments to support her
wishes against her convictions from other people.




[Pageheading: DISSOLUTION OR RESIGNATION]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _7th May 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and laments
much the prospect that lies before us, more especially as it is so
repugnant to your Majesty's feelings. Your Majesty has often observed
that these events must come in the course of affairs at some moment or
another, but Lord Melbourne knows not whether it is much consolation
to reflect that what is very disagreeable is also natural and
unavoidable. Lord Melbourne feels certain that your Majesty will
consider the situation calmly and impartially, will do that which
shall appear the best for your own interests and those of the country,
which are identical.

Everything shall be done that can be; the questions which may arise
shall be considered well, and upon as full information as can be
obtained. But Lord Melbourne has little to add to what he wrote to
your Majesty yesterday. So many interests are affected by this Sugar
question, the West Indian, the East Indian, the opponents of Slavery
and others, that no small number of our supporters will be induced
either to stay away or to vote against us, and this must place us in
a minority upon the main points of our Budget. In this we can hardly
acquiesce, nor can we adopt a different policy and propose other
taxes, when in our opinion the necessary revenue can be raised without
imposing them. This state of things imposes upon us the alternative
of dissolution or of resignation, and to try the former without
succeeding in it would be to place both your Majesty and ourselves in
a worse situation than that in which we are at present.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _8th May 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. We have been
considering this question of dissolution at the Cabinet, and we have
had before us a general statement of the public returns for England
and Wales. It is not very favourable, but Lord Melbourne fears that it
is more favourable than the reality would prove. The Chancellor,[23]
Palmerston, and Hobhouse are strongly for dissolution, but the opinion
of the majority is the other way, and in that opinion Lord Melbourne
is strongly inclined to agree.

Lord Melbourne will have the honour of waiting upon your Majesty
to-morrow at three.

    [Footnote 23: The Earl of Cottenham.]




[Pageheading: SIR ROBERT PEEL]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

NOTES UPON AN INTERVIEW WITH SIR ROBERT PEEL (NO. 1).[24]

_9th May 1841._

Told Sir Robert that I had wished to have sought him through the
medium of a common friend, which would have given him a greater
confidence than I had now a right to expect at his hands, but I
felt upon so delicate a mission it was safer, and would be more in
accordance with his wishes, to come direct.

That the Prince had sent me to him, with the object of removing
difficulties upon his coming into office.

That Her Majesty was anxious that the question of the removal of the
Ladies of the Bedchamber should not be revived, and would wish that
in any personal communication with Sir Robert this question might be
avoided.

That it might be arranged that if Sir Robert would not insist upon
carrying out his principle, Her Majesty might procure the resignation
of any Ladies whom Sir Robert might object to; that I thought there
might be a disposition to yield to the removal of the Mistress of the
Robes, Lady Normanby, and the Duchess of Bedford, as being connected
with leading political persons in Government.

Endeavoured to impress upon Sir Robert that if he acts fairly and
kindly towards the Queen, he will be met in the same spirit.

Sir Robert said he had considered the probable object of my interview,
and thought, from my former position with Lord Melbourne, that Lord
Melbourne would be aware of my coming. He must be assured of this
before he could speak confidentially to me.

Upon this I admitted that Lord Melbourne had knowledge of my
intention, but that I was not authorised to say that he had.

Sir Robert said, "I shall put aside all form, and treat you frankly
and confidentially. You may depend upon every word you say being held
as sacred. No part, without further permission, shall be mentioned
even to the Duke, much less to any of my other colleagues.

"_I would waive every pretension to office, I declare to God! sooner
than that my acceptance of it should be attended with any personal
humiliation to the Queen._"

He thought that giving in the names of those Ladies whom he considered
obnoxious was an offensive course towards the Queen.

For the sake of office, which he did not covet, he could not concede
any constitutional principle, but it was not necessary that that
principle should be mooted.

"It would be repulsive to my feelings that Her Majesty should part
with any of her Ladies, as the _result of a forced stipulation on my
part_; in a party sense it would doubtless be advantageous to me to
say that I had demanded from the Queen, and the Queen had conceded to
me the appointments of these three Ladies."

The mode he would like, and which he considered as least objectionable
for Her Majesty, was for Her Majesty to say to him, "There is no
occasion to revive this constitutional question, as those ladies
immediately connected with prominent members of the Administration
have sent in their resignation."

The vacancies existing before Sir Robert Peel sees Her Majesty, there
is no necessity for discussion.

On the one hand, by this means, there was less appearance of insult to
the Queen, and on the other, there was no appearance of concession of
principle upon his.

Sir Robert was ready to make any personal sacrifice for Her Majesty's
comfort, except that of his honour. "Can the Queen for an instant
suppose that I would permit my party to urge me on to insist upon
anything incompatible with Her Majesty's dignity, which it would be my
great aim and honour to defend?"

[This was his indignant reply to my remark upon the rumours that his
party would press him to coerce and subdue Her Majesty.]

Sir Robert thinks it better for the Queen to avoid anything in the
shape of a stipulation. He would like what he would have done upon
a former occasion (and upon which, on the honour of a gentleman, his
views had undergone no change) to be taken as a test of what he would
be ready to concede to.

Nothing but misconception, he said, could in his opinion have led
to failure before. "_Had the Queen told me_" (after the question
was mooted, which it never need have been) "_that those three
ladies immediately connected with the Government had tendered their
resignation, I should have been perfectly satisfied_, and should have
consulted the Queen's feelings in replacing them."

Sir Robert said this conversation shall remain sacred, and to all
effect, as if it had never happened, until he saw me again to-morrow
morning.

There is nothing said, he added, which in any way pledges or
compromises the Queen, the Prince, or Lord Melbourne.

    [Footnote 24: See Parker's _Sir Robert Peel_, vol. ii. p. 455,
    _et seq._, where Peel's memorandum of the interview is set
    out.]




[Pageheading: SIR ROBERT PEEL]

[Pageheading: HOUSEHOLD APPOINTMENTS]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

INTERVIEW WITH SIR ROBERT PEEL (No. 2).

_10th May 1841._

Peel said: "It is essential to my position with the Queen that Her
Majesty should understand that I have the feelings of a gentleman, and
where my duty does not interfere, I cannot act against her wishes.
Her Majesty doubtless knows how pressed I am as the head of a powerful
party, but the impression I wish to create in Her Majesty's mind is,
that I am bound to defend her against their encroachments."

In regard to Household appointments the holders of which are not in
Parliament, he had not considered the question, but in the meantime he
would in no way commit himself to anyone, or to any understanding
upon the subject, without previous communication. He had no personal
objects to serve, and the Queen's wishes would always be consulted.

He again repeated, that if the Queen's personal feelings would suffer
less by forming an Administration to his exclusion, he should not be
offended. Private life satisfied him, and he had no ambition beyond
it.

Lord Melbourne might rest assured that _he_ fully appreciated his aim,
that his only object was to do that which was most for Her Majesty's
advantage, and no human being should know that he was privy to
this overture. Lord Melbourne might depend upon his honour. If Lord
Melbourne was pressed to a dissolution he should still feel the same
impression of Lord Melbourne's conduct, that it was honourable and
straightforward.

He wished the Prince to send him a list of those Ladies whom it would
be agreeable to Her Majesty to have in her Household. Sir Robert must
propose it to the Ladies, but will be entirely guided by Her Majesty's
wishes. There should be no appearance that Her Majesty has any
understanding, as he was bound to his party to make it appear that the
appointments emanated from himself.[25]

    [Footnote 25: There was a further interview on the following
    day at which various detailed points were arranged.]




_Memorandum by the Queen._

_11th May 1841._

The Queen considers it her right (and is aware that her predecessors
were peculiarly tenacious of this right) to appoint her Household.
She, however, gives up the great officers of State and those of
her Lords-in-Waiting, Equerries, and Grooms-in-Waiting, who are _in
Parliament_, to the appointment of the Prime Minister, subject to her
approval.

The Queen has _always_ appointed her _Ladies of the Bedchamber
herself_, but has generally mentioned their names to the Prime
Minister before appointing them, in order to leave him room for
objection in case he should deem their appointment injurious to his
Government, when the Queen would probably not appoint the Lady.

The Maids of Honour and Women of the Bedchamber are of course not
included amongst those who are mentioned to the Prime Minister before
their appointment, but are at once appointed by the Queen.




[Pageheading: PRESSURE OF BUSINESS]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Wednesday, 12th May 1841._

"At seven minutes to five Lord Melbourne came to me and stayed till
half-past five. He gave me the copies of Anson's conversations with
Peel. Lord Melbourne then gave me a letter from the Chancellor to
read, strongly advocating a dissolution, and wishing that there should
be a division also on Lord John Russell's amendment.[26]

"Lord Melbourne left the letter with me. The first part of the letter,
relative to Lord John's amendment, we think good, but the other
part we can't quite agree in. 'There is to be a Cabinet to-morrow
to consider what is to be done,' said Lord Melbourne, 'for the
Chancellor's opinion must be considered. There is a preferment amongst
our people for dissolution,' Lord M. added. The feeling in the country
good. I asked Lord M., 'Must they resign directly, the next day, after
the division (if they intended resigning)?' 'Why,' he said, 'it was
awkward _not_ to do so if Parliament was sitting; if the division were
only to take place on Friday, then they needn't announce it till Monday,'
which we hope will be the case, as we agreed it wouldn't do for me to
have a ball the day Lord M. had resigned, and before I had sent for
anybody else, and therefore I hoped that it could be managed that the
division did not take place till Friday. Lord M. said that in case they
resigned, he wished Vernon Smith[27] to be made a Privy Councillor; the
only addition to the Peers he mentioned the other day he wished to make
is Surrey;[28] we agreed that too many Peers was always a bad thing."

    [Footnote 26: To Lord Sandon's resolution on the Sugar Duties.]

    [Footnote 27: Robert Vernon Smith (1800-1873), Under-Secretary
    for War and the Colonies, afterwards Lord Lyveden.]

    [Footnote 28: The Earl of Surrey (1791-1856) was now M.P. for
    West Sussex, and Treasurer of the Household, and was afterwards
    thirteenth Duke of Norfolk.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_11th May 1841._

... I am sure you will forgive my writing a very short letter to-day,
but I am so harassed and occupied with business that I cannot find
time to write letters. You will, I am sure, _feel_ for me; the
probability of parting from so kind and excellent a being as Lord
Melbourne as a _Minister_ (for a _friend_ he will _always_ remain) is
very, _very_ painful, even if one feels it will not probably be for
long; to take it philosophically is my great wish, and _quietly_
I certainly shall, but one cannot help _feelings_ of affection and
gratitude. Albert is the greatest possible comfort to me in every way,
and my position is much more independent than it was before.

I am glad you see the French feeling in the right light. I rejoice
that the christening, etc., went off so well. Believe me, ever, your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: QUESTION OF DISSOLUTION]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Thursday, 13th May 1841._

"Saw Lord Melbourne at a little past four.

"... 'We have had a Cabinet,' Lord Melbourne said, 'and we have been
considering the question of dissolution and what is the best course
to be pursued; if we were to dissolve, John Russell,' he said, 'would
pursue quite a different course; he would then announce the Sugar
Duties at once. I (Lord Melbourne) said, that I had been considering
well the whole question, and the Chancellor's letter, but that
altogether I did not think it advisable to have recourse to a
dissolution--and I think the greater part lean towards that opinion;
but there _are_ a few who are very much for a dissolution--the
Chancellor and Hobhouse very much so, and Palmerston. They have,
however, not quite finally decided the matter. I understand the debate
will certainly go over to-night,' he said, 'and that they would have
time on Saturday and Sunday to consider about Lord John's amendment.'"




_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Saturday, 15th May 1841._

"Lord Melbourne came to me at twenty minutes past one, and we talked
about this question of dissolution. 'We shall have a long debate upon
it this morning at the Cabinet,' Lord Melbourne said. 'The worst thing
is, that if we carry the Sugar Duties, we must dissolve. If we were to
dissolve,' he continued, 'and were to have the parties equal as they
are now, it would be very bad; if we _were_ to have a _majority_, it
would be a great thing; _but_ if we were to have a minority it would
be still worse.... We know that Charles I. and Charles II., and even
Cromwell, appealed to the country, and had a Parliament returned
into their very teeth' (so strong an Opposition), 'and that produced
deposition, and convulsion, and bloodshed and death; but since then
the Crown has always had a majority returned in favour of it. Even
Queen Anne,' he continued, 'who removed Marlborough in the midst of
his most glorious victories and dissolved Parliament, had an immense
majority, though her measures were miserable; William IV.,' he said,
'even though he had a majority against him which prevented him from
keeping his Ministers, had a much stronger feeling for him in that
Parliament, than he ever had before. But I am afraid,' he added, 'that
for the first time the Crown would have an Opposition returned smack
against it; and that would be an affront to which I am very unwilling
to expose the Crown.' This is very true."




[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD'S SYMPATHY]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

TUILERIES, _14th May 1841._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I am deeply grateful for your kind letter, which
reached me this morning. Letters from hence ought not to be longer
on their way than, at the longest, forty hours; forty-eight is the
maximum. I fear that they are delayed at the Foreign Office; here it
cannot be, as for instance these lines go this evening.

I can easily understand that the present crisis must have something
very painful for you, and you will do well for your health and comfort
to try to take it as philosophically as possible; it is a part of
the Constitutional system which is for the Sovereign very hard to get
over.

_Nous savons tous des paroles sur cet air_, as the French say. I was
convinced that Lord Melbourne's right and good feeling would make him
pause before he proposed to you a dissolution. A general election in
England, when great passions must be roused or created to render
it efficacious for one party or another, is a dangerous experiment,
always calculated to shake the foundations on which have hitherto
reposed the great elements of the political power of the country.
Albert will be a great comfort to you, and to hear it from yourself
has given me the sincerest delight. His judgment is good, and he is
mild and safe in his opinions; they deserve your serious attention;
young as he is, I have really often been quite surprised how quick and
correct his judgment is....




[Pageheading: TORY DISSENSIONS]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _16th May 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that the general effect of last week's debate[29]
has been greatly in favour of the measures of your Majesty's
Ministers.

The speeches of Mr Labouchere, Sir George Grey, and Lord Howick, with
the powerful argument of the Chancellor of the Exchequer on Friday
night, have not been met by any corresponding ability on the other
side.

In fact the Opposition seem to have concealed their own views of
policy, and to have imagined that the Anti-Slavery feeling would carry
them through successfully. But this expectation has been entirely
disappointed; debate has unmasked the hollow pretence of humanity,
and the meetings at Exeter Hall and in the country have completely
counteracted the impressions which Dr Lushington's speech[30] had
produced.

Lancashire, Cheshire, and the West Riding of Yorkshire have been
roused to strong excitement by the prospect of a reduction of the
duty on corn. Several of the large towns have expressed their opinions
without distinction of party.

These symptoms are said to have created some dissensions among the
opponents of your Majesty's present Government.

Sir Robert Peel, Lord Stanley, and nearly all the eminent leaders
of the party, profess their adherence to the principles of Mr
Huskisson.[31] On the other hand, the Duke of Buckingham,[32] with
many Lords and Commoners, is opposed to any relaxation of the
present Corn Laws. This difference must ultimately produce serious
consequences, and it is possible they may break out before the present
debate is ended.

One consequence of the propositions of the Ministry is the
weakening of the power of the Chartists, who have relied on the
misrepresentation that neither Whigs nor Tories would ever do anything
for the improvement of the condition of the working classes.

All these circumstances have a bearing on the question of a
dissolution of Parliament, and are to be weighed against the risks and
inconveniences of so bold a measure.

    [Footnote 29: On Lord Sandon's resolution.]

    [Footnote 30: Against the Budget, on the ground that it tended
    to encourage slavery.]

    [Footnote 31: Which were opposed to Protection and the
    Navigation Laws.]

    [Footnote 32: Richard Plantagenet (1797-1861), second Duke of
    the 1822 creation, M.P. for Bucks 1818-1839, and author of
    the "Chandos clause," became Lord Privy Seal this year, but
    resigned shortly after. He dissipated his property, and had to
    sell the contents of Stowe.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S JOURNAL]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Monday, 17th May 1841._

"Lord Melbourne came to me at twenty minutes to three. There were no
_new_ news. He gave me a letter from the Duke of Roxburgh,[33] saying
he could not support Government on the Corn Laws, and writing an
unnecessarily cold letter. Lord Melbourne fears this would lose
Roxburgh in case of an election. A great many of the friends of the
Government, however, are against any alteration in the Corn Laws.
Talked of the excellent accounts from the country with which the
papers are full, and I said I couldn't help thinking the Government
would gain by a dissolution, and the feeling in the country so strong,
and daily increasing. They would lose the counties, Lord Melbourne
thinks, and the question is whether their successes in the
manufacturing towns would be sufficient to counterbalance that. The
debate may last longer, Lord Melbourne says, as J. Russell says he
will continue it as long as their friends wish it. Many of their
friends would be very angry if we did not dissolve, Lord Melbourne
says. 'I say always,' said Lord Melbourne, 'that your Majesty will
be in such a much worse position' (if a majority should be returned
against us), 'but they say not, for that the others would dissolve.'
I said that if that was so we _must dissolve_, for then that it would
come to just the same thing, and that that changed my opinion very
much. 'You would like us then to make the attempt?' Lord Melbourne
asked. I said 'Almost.' I asked if he really thought they would
dissolve. 'I've great reason to believe they would,' he replied.
'Hardinge[34] told Vivian[35] "we shall prevent _your_ dissolving, but
_we shall_ dissolve."' ... I asked did Lord Melbourne think they (the
Conservatives) would remain in long, and Melbourne said: 'One can't
tell beforehand what may happen, but you would find their divisions
and dissensions amongst themselves sufficient to prevent their staying
in long.' ...

"Saw Lord John Russell, who didn't feel certain if the debate would
end to-night. Talked of the very good feeling in the country. He said
he understood Sir Edward Knatchbull[36] was exceedingly displeased at
what Peel had said concerning Free Trade, and said in that case Peel
would be as bad as the present Government. He thinks the Tories, if in
power, might try and collect the Sugar duties without Law, which would
do them a great deal of harm and be exceedingly unpopular. He does
_not_ think the Tories intend _certainly_ to dissolve. He thinks they
would not dissolve now, and that they would hereafter get so entangled
by their own dissensions, as to render it unfavourable to them."

    [Footnote 33: James, sixth Duke. The Duchess was afterwards a
    Lady of the Bedchamber.]

    [Footnote 34: Sir Henry Hardinge (1785-1856) had been
    Secretary at War, and Chief Secretary for Ireland, under
    former Tory Governments.]

    [Footnote 35: Master-General of the Ordnance.]

    [Footnote 36: M.P. for East Kent. He became Paymaster-General
    in Peel's Cabinet.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_18th May 1841._

... I was sure you would feel for me. Since last Monday, the 10th, we
have lived in the daily expectation of a final event taking place, and
the debate _still_ continues, and it is not certain whether it will
even finish to-night, this being the eighth night, it having begun on
Friday the 7th, two Saturdays and two Sundays having intervened! Our
plans are so unsettled that I can tell you nothing, only that you
may depend upon it nothing will be done without having been duly,
properly, and maturely weighed. Lord Melbourne's conduct is as usual
perfect; fair, calm, and totally disinterested, and I am certain that
in whatever position he is _you_ will treat him _just_ as you have
always done.

My dearest Angel is indeed a great comfort to me. He takes the
greatest interest in what goes on, feeling with and for me, and yet
abstaining as he ought from biassing me either way, though we talk
much on the subject, and his judgment is, as you say, good and
mild....

_P.S._--Pray let me hear soon _when_ you come. You, I know, like me
to tell you what I hear, and for me to be frank with you. I therefore
tell you that it is believed by some people here, and even by some
in the Government, that _you_ wish my Government to be _out_. Now,
I never for an instant can believe such an assertion, as I know your
liberal feelings, and your interest in my welfare and in that of
the country too well to think you could wish for such a thing, and I
immediately said I was sure this was not so; but I think you would
do well to say to Seymour something which might imply interest in my
present Government.

I know you will understand my anxiety on your account, lest such a
mischievous report should be believed. It comes, you see, from the
idea that your feelings are very French.




[Pageheading: THE CORN LAWS]


_Extract from the Queen's Journal._

_Tuesday, 18th May 1841._

"Saw Lord Melbourne.[37] He said Lord John Russell had been to
see him, and, 'He now wishes us not to resign, but to give notice
immediately of a Motion on the Corn Laws. This, he thinks, will make
the others propose a vote of confidence, or make them oppose the Sugar
Duties, which, he thinks, will be better for us to resign upon,
and when it would be clear to our people that we couldn't dissolve.
Everybody says it would be a very bad thing for us to resign now, upon
such a question as this, and we must consider the party a little.' I
said, of course, this would be agreeable to me as it gave us another
chance. I said it would be awkward if they resigned Thursday, on
account of the Birthday. Lord Melbourne said I could wait a day and
only send for Peel on Saturday, that that wouldn't signify to Peel,
as he could come down to Claremont.... I asked, in case they meant to
bring on this Corn Law question, when would they do so. 'Perhaps about
the 30th,' Lord Melbourne said. It would be a more dangerous question,
but it would make them (the Tories) show their colours, which is a
great advantage. He said they prevented Sir Edward Knatchbull from
speaking last night."

    [Footnote 37: After eight days' discussions of Lord Sandon's
    Motion, the Ministers were defeated by 317 to 281.]




[Pageheading: RESIGNATION POSTPONED]


_Wednesday, 19th May._

"At twenty minutes to one came Lord Melbourne.... I returned him Lord
John Russell's letter, and talked of it, and of John Russell's saying
the division and Peel's speech made it absolutely necessary to decide
_to-day_ whether to _resign_ or _dissolve_. I asked what Peel had
said in his speech about the Corn Laws. 'I'll tell you, Ma'am, what he
said,' Lord Melbourne replied, 'that he was for a sliding duty and
not for a fixed duty; but he did not pledge himself as to what rate of
duty it should be. I must say,' Lord Melbourne continued, 'I am
still against dissolution. I don't think our chances of success are
sufficient.' I replied that I couldn't quite believe that, but that I
might be wrong. Lord John is for dissolving. '_You_ wish it?' I said I
always did. Talked of the feeling in the City and in the country being
so good. Lord Melbourne don't think so much of the feeling in the
country. Talked of the majority of thirty-six having not been more
than they expected.... Lord Melbourne said people thought the debate
was lengthened to please me. I said not at all, but that it was more
convenient for me. Anyhow I need do nothing till Saturday. The House
of Commons was adjourned to the next day, and the House of Lords to
Monday. 'Mr Baring says,' he said, 'if there was only a majority
one way or another, it would be better than this state of complete
equality.'

"At twenty minutes past four Lord Melbourne returned. 'Well, Ma'am,'
he said, 'we've considered this question, and both the sides of
it well, and at last we voted upon it; and there were--the Lord
Chancellor for dissolution, Lord Minto[38] for it, Lord Normanby
against it, but greatly modified; Lord John for, Lord Palmerston for,
Lord Clarendon for, Lord Morpeth for, Lord Lansdowne for, Labouchere
for, Hobhouse for, Duncannon[39] for, Baring for, Macaulay for; and
under those circumstances of course I felt I could not but go with
them.[40] Lord Melbourne was much affected in saying all this. 'So we
shall go on, bring on the Sugar Duties, and then, if things are in a
pretty good state, dissolve. I hope you approve?' I said I did highly
... and that I felt so happy to keep him longer. 'You are aware we may
have a majority against us?' he said; he means in our election. The
Sugar Duties would probably take a fortnight or three weeks to pass,
and they would dissolve in June and meet again in October. He thought
they must."

    [Footnote 38: Lord Minto was First Lord of the Admiralty.]

    [Footnote 39: Then First Commissioner of Land Revenue.]

    [Footnote 40: See Sir John Hobhouse's account of this Cabinet
    meeting, _Edinburgh Review_, vol. 133, p. 336.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN AND THE CHURCH]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_21st May 1841._

Lord Melbourne thinks that what your Majesty proposes to say will do
very well, but it is thought best to say "Church as Reformed" at the
Reformation.

If your Majesty could say this, it would be well:

"I am very grateful for your congratulations on the return of this
day. I am happy to take this opportunity of again expressing to you my
firm determination to maintain the Church of England as settled at
the Reformation, and my firm belief in her Articles and Creeds, as
hitherto understood and interpreted by her soundest divines."

Nothing could go off better than the dinner. Everybody was much
pleased with the Prince.

Lord Melbourne is not conscious of having slept.[41]

    [Footnote 41: It seems that some one had told the Queen that
    Lord Melbourne had fallen asleep at dinner.]




[Pageheading: FEELING IN FRANCE]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

BRUSSELS, _20th May 1841._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I receive this very moment your dear letter of
the 18th, and without loss of time I begin my answer here, though the
messenger can only go to-morrow. I cannot _sufficiently_ express to
you my _gratitude_ for the frankness with which you have written
to me--and let me entreat you, whenever you have anything _sur
le c[oe]ur_, to _do the same_. I shall begin with your postscript
concerning the idea that I wished your present Ministers to retire,
because they had become disagreeable to France. The people who
_avancent quelque chose de la sorte_ probably have some ill-natured
motive which it is not always easy to guess; perhaps in the present
instance does it mean, let us say, _that?_ whatever opinion he may
then express we can easily counteract it, representing it as the
result of _strong partiality to France_. Let us therefore examine
what France has to gain in a change of Administration. Certainly your
present Ministers are _not_ much loved _now_ in France, not so much in
consequence of the political events of last year themselves, than for
the _manner_ in which they came to pass. Nevertheless, when I was at
Paris, King and Council were decided to sign the treaty with the four
other Powers, which would put an end to the _isolement_, though many
people are stoutly _for the isolement_. There end the relations which
will exist for some time between the two countries--they will be on
_decent_ terms; that is all I wish for the present, and it is matter
of moonshine who your Ministers are. No doubt, formerly there existed
such a predilection in favour of Lord Grey's[42] Administration and
those who continued it, that the coming in of the Tories would have
been considered as a great public calamity; but even now, though
this affection is gone, the Tories will also be looked on with some
suspicion. Lord Melbourne's Administration has had the great merit of
being liberal, and at the same time prudent, conservative in the good
sense of the word, preserving what was good. Monarchy, by an adherence
to this system, was very safe, and the popular liberal cry needless.

    [Footnote 42: 1830-1834.]




[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD'S ADVICE]


(_Continued at_) LAEKEN, _21st May._

I regret that the Corn question was brought forward somewhat
abruptly;[43] it is a dangerous one, as it roused the most numerous
and poorest classes of society, and may easily degenerate into
bloodshed. The dissolution under such circumstances would become still
more a source of agitation, as it generally always is in England. Lord
Melbourne, I am sure, will think so too.

I am delighted by what you say of Albert; it is just the proper line
for him to take, without biassing you either way, to show you honestly
the consequences which in his opinion the one or the other may have.
As he has really a very clear and logical judgment, his opinion will
be valuable for you. I feel very much for you, and these Ministerial
complications are of a most painful and perplexing nature, though
less in England than on the Continent, as the thing is at least better
understood. To amuse you a little, and to prove to you how impartial
I must be to be in this way accused by both parties, I must tell you
that it is said in France that, conjointly with Lord Melbourne,
we _artfully_ ruined the Thiers Administration,[44] to the great
detriment of the honour and welfare of France. But what is still
stranger is, that the younger branches of the family, seeing that my
arrival at Paris was delayed from time to time, became convinced that
_I would not come at all_, and that my intention was to _cut them
completely_, not to _compromettre_ myself with England! Truly people
are strange, and the unnecessary suspicions and stories which they
love to have, and to tell, a great bore....

Pray have the goodness of giving my _kindest_ regards to Lord
Melbourne. I will love him very _tenderly_ in and out of office, as
I am really attached to him. Now last, though first, I offer my
sincerest wishes on the happy return of your birthday; may every
blessing be always bestowed on your beloved head. You possess _much_,
let your warm and honest heart _appreciate_ that. Let me also express
the hope that you always will maintain your _dear character true_
and _good_ as it is, and let us also humbly express the hope that
our warmth of feeling, a valuable gift, will not be permitted to
grow occasionally a little violent, and particularly not against your
uncle. You may pull Albertus by the ear, when so inclined, but be
never irritated against your uncle. But I have _not to complain_ when
other people do not instigate such things; you have always been kind
and affectionate, and when you look at my deeds for you, and on
behalf of you, these twenty-two years, I think you will not have many
hardships to recollect. I am happy to hear of my god-daughter's teeth,
and that she is so well. May God keep the whole dear little family
well and happy for ever. My dearest Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 43: The Ministerial proposal of a fixed duty instead
    of a sliding scale.]

    [Footnote 44: The Thiers Government had resigned in the
    preceding October, owing to the King objecting to the warlike
    speech which they wished him to pronounce to the Chambers. The
    Soult-Guizot Cabinet was accordingly formed.]




[Pageheading: SIR ROBERT PEEL]


_Memorandum of Mr Anson's last secret interview with Sir R. Peel._
(No. 4.)

_Sunday, 23rd May 1841._

Called upon Sir Robert Peel this morning. I said I could not feel
satisfied without seeing him after the very unexpected course which
political affairs had taken. I wished to know that he felt assured,
though I trusted there could be no doubt upon his mind, that there
had been perfect honesty of purpose on my part towards him, and more
especially upon the part of those with whose knowledge I had been
acting. I assured Sir Robert that H.M. had acted in _the most perfect
fairness towards him_, and I was most anxious that there should be no
erroneous impression upon his mind as to the conduct of either H.M. or
the Prince.

I said (quoting the Prince's expression), "that the Queen has a
natural modesty upon her constitutional views, and when she receives
an advice from men like the Lord Chancellor, Lord John Russell, Mr
Baring, Mr Labouchere, and Lord Clarendon, and knows that they have
been weighing the question through so many days, she concludes that
her judgment cannot be better than theirs, and that she would do wrong
to reject their advice."

The Prince, I said, however strongly impressed for or against a
question, thinks it wrong and impolitic, considering his age and
inexperience and his novelty to the country, to press upon the Queen
views of his own in opposition to those of experienced statesmen. Sir
Robert said he could relieve my mind entirely; that he was convinced
that all that had taken place had been with the most perfect honesty;
that he had no feeling whatever of annoyance, or of having been
ill-used; that, on the contrary, he had the feeling, and should always
retain it, of the deepest gratitude to the Queen for the condescension
which Her Majesty had been pleased to show him, and that it had only
increased his devotion to Her Majesty's person. He said that much of
the reserve which he had shown in treating with me was not on _his
own_ account, but that he felt from his own experience that events
were by no means certain, and he most cautiously abstained from
permitting her Majesty in any way to commit herself, or to bind
herself by any engagement which unforeseen circumstances might render
inconvenient. Sir Robert said it was very natural to try and remove
obstacles which had before created so much confusion, and he was
convinced that they would have been practically removed by what had
passed. He said that neither Lord Stanley nor Sir James Graham knew
a word of what had passed. That Mr Greville had asked his friend Mr
Arbuthnot whether some understanding had not been entered into between
Lord Melbourne and him. That Mr Arbuthnot had replied that he was
certain that nothing of the sort could have passed,[45] as, if it had,
Sir Robert Peel would have informed him (Mr Arbuthnot) of the fact.
Again, Lady de Grey, the night of the ball at the Palace, came up to
him and said the Duke of Bedford had been speaking to her about the
resignation of the Duchess of Bedford, and asking her whether she
thought it necessary. She volunteered to find out from Sir Robert
whether he thought it requisite. She asked the question, which Sir
Robert tried to evade, but not being able, he said it struck him that
if it was a question of doubt the best means of solving it, was for
the Duke of Bedford to ask Lord Melbourne for his opinion.

I added that if the dissolution was a failure, which it was generally
apprehended would be the case, I felt convinced that Sir Robert would
be dealt with in the most perfect fairness by Her Majesty.

    [Footnote 45: "After I had been told by the Duke of Bedford
    that Peel was going to insist on certain terms, which was
    repeated to me by Clarendon, I went to Arbuthnot, told him
    Melbourne's impression, and asked him what it all meant. He
    said it was all false, that he was certain Peel had no such
    intentions, but, on the contrary, as he had before assured me,
    was disposed to do everything that would be conciliatory
    and agreeable to the Queen."--_Greville's Journal_, 19th May
    1841.]




[Pageheading: VOTE OF WANT OF CONFIDENCE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _24th May 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has to
acquaint your Majesty that in the House of Commons this evening
Sir Robert Peel gave notice that on Thursday next he would move a
resolution to the following effect: "That Her Majesty's Ministers not
possessing power sufficient to carry into effect the measures
which they considered necessary, their retention of office was
unconstitutional and contrary to usage."[46] These are not the exact
words, but they convey the substance. This is a direct vote of want of
confidence, and Lord Melbourne would be inclined to doubt whether it
will be carried, and if it is, it certainly will not be by so large
a majority as the former vote. When the Chancellor of the Exchequer
moved the resolution upon the Sugar Duties, Sir Robert Peel seconded
the motion, thereby intending to intimate that he did not mean to
interfere with the Supplies. This course was determined upon at a
meeting held at Sir R. Peel's this morning.

    [Footnote 46: The closing words of the resolution were as
    follows: "... That Her Majesty's Ministers do not sufficiently
    possess the confidence of the House of Commons to enable
    them to carry through the House measures which they deem of
    essential importance to the public welfare, and that their
    continuance in office under such circumstances is at variance
    with the spirit of the Constitution."]




[Pageheading: PROSPECT OF DISSOLUTION]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _28th May 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that Sir Robert Peel yesterday brought forward his
motion in a remarkably calm and temperate speech.

Sir John Hobhouse and Mr Macaulay completely exposed the fallacy
of his resolution, and successfully vindicated the government. Lord
Worsley[47] declared he would oppose the resolution, which declaration
excited great anger, and produced much disappointment in the Tory
party.

If the debate is carried on till next week, it is probable the
Ministers may have a majority of one or two.

The accounts from the country are encouraging.

It does not appear that Sir Robert Peel, even if he carries this
motion, intends to obstruct the measures necessary for a dissolution
of Parliament.

    [Footnote 47: M.P. for Lincolnshire, who had voted for Lord
    Sandon's motion.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_31st May 1841._

... I beg you _not_ to be alarmed about what is to be done; it is
_not_ for a Party triumph that Parliament (_the longest_ that has
sat for _many_ years) is to be dissolved; it is the fairest and most
constitutional mode of proceeding; and you may trust to the moderation
and prudence of my whole Government that nothing will be done without
due consideration; if the present Government get a majority by the
elections they will go on prosperously; if not, the Tories will come
in for a short time. The country is quiet and the people very well
disposed. I am happy, dearest Uncle, to give you these quieting news,
which I assure you are _not_ partial....




[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD'S VIEWS]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN _31st May 1841._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--Your Mother[48] is safely arrived, though she
was received close to Ostende by a formidable thunderstorm. I had
given directions that everywhere great civilities should be shown her.
She stood the fatigues better than I had expected, and is less sleepy
than in England. She seems to be pleased with her _séjour_ here, and
inclined in fact to remain rather than to go on; but I am sure, when
once in Germany she will be both pleased and interested by it. It will
amuse you to hear from herself her own impressions.

I cannot help to add a few political lines. I regret much, I must
confess, that the idea of a dissolution has gained ground, and I will
try to show in a very few words why I am against it.

In politics, a great rule ought to be to rule with the things which
one _knows already_, and not to jump into something entirely new of
which no one can do more _than guess the consequences._ The present
Parliament has been elected at a moment most favourable to the
present Administration after a most popular accession to the throne,
everything new and fresh, and with the natural fondness of the great
mass of people, a change is always popular; it was known that you were
kindly disposed towards your Ministers, everything was therefore
_à souhait_ for the election of a new Parliament. In this respect
Ministers have nothing like the favourable circumstances which smiled
upon them at the last general election. Feeling this, they raise a
cry, which may become popular and embarrass their antagonists about
_cheap_ bread! I do not think this is quite befitting their
dignity; such things do for revolutionaries like Thiers, or my
late Ministers.... If the thing rouses the people it may do serious
mischief; if not, it will look awkward for the Ministers themselves.
If you do not grant a dissolution to your present Ministers you would
have, at the coming in of a new Administration, the right to tell them
that they must go on with the present Parliament; and I have no doubt
that they could do so. The statistics of the present House of Commons
are well known to all the men who sit in it, and to keep it a few
years longer would be a real advantage.

You know that I have been rather maltreated by the Tories, formerly to
please George IV., and since I left the country, because I served, in
their opinion, on the revolutionary side of the question. I must
say, however, that for your service as well as for the quiet of the
country, it would be good to give them a trial. If they could not
remain in office it will make them quieter for some time. If by
a dissolution the Conservative interest in the House is too much
weakened the permanent interests of the country can but suffer from
that. If, on the contrary, the Conservatives come in stronger, your
position will not be very agreeable, and it may induce them to be
perhaps less moderate than they ought to be. I should be very happy if
you would discuss these, my _hasty_ views, with Lord Melbourne. I
do not give them for more than what they are, mere _practical_
considerations; but, as far as I can judge of the question, if I was
myself concerned I should have no dissolution; if even there was but
the very _banale_ consideration, _qu'on sait ce qu'on a, mais qu'on ne
sait nullement ce qu'on aura_. The moment is not without importance,
and well worthy your earnest consideration, and I feel convinced that
Lord Melbourne will agree with me, that, notwithstanding the great
political good sense of the people in England, the machine is so
complicated that it should be handled with great care and tenderness.

To conclude, I must add that perhaps a permanent duty on corn may be a
desirable thing, but that it ought to be sufficiently high to serve as
a real protection. It may besides produce this effect, that as it
will be necessary, at least at first, to buy a good deal of the to be
imported corn with _money_, the currency will be seriously affected
by it. The countries which would have a chance of selling would be
chiefly Poland in all its parts, Prussia, Austria, and Russia, the
South of Russia on the Black Sea, and maybe Sicily. Germany does not
grow a sufficient quantity of wheat to profit by such an arrangement;
it will besides not buy more from England for the present than it does
now, owing to the Zollverein,[49] which must first be altered. But I
will not bore you too long, and conclude with my best love to little
Victoria, of whom her Grandmama speaks with raptures. Ever, my dearest
Victoria, your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 48: The Duchess of Kent had left England for a tour
    on the Continent.]

    [Footnote 49: After the fall of Napoleon, the hopes of many
    Germans for a united national Germany were frustrated by
    the Congress of Vienna, which perpetuated the practical
    independence of a number of German States, as well as the
    predominance within the Germanic confederation of Austria,
    a Power largely non-German. One of the chief factors in the
    subsequent unification of Germany was the Zollverein, or
    Customs Union, by which North Germany was gradually bound
    together by commercial interest, and thus opposed to Austria.
    The success of this method of imperial integration has not
    been without influence on the policies of other lands.]




[Pageheading: THE OPPOSITION ELATED]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

_WILTON CRESCENT, 5th June 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to state that the House divided about three this morning.

  For Sir Robert Peel       312
  Against                   311
                            ---
  Majority                    1

The Opposition were greatly elated by this triumph. Lord Stanley, and
Sir Robert Peel who spoke last in the debate, did not deny that the
Crown might exercise the prerogative of dissolution in the present
case. But they insisted that no time should be lost in previous
debates, especially on such a subject as the Corn Laws.

Lord John Russell spoke after Lord Stanley, and defended the whole
policy of the Administration.

After the division he stated that he would on Monday propose the
remaining estimates, and announce the course which he meant to pursue
respecting the Corn Laws.




[Pageheading: MARRIAGE OF LORD JOHN RUSSELL]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_6th June 1841._

... Now, many thanks for two letters of the 31st ult. and 4th June.
The former I shall not answer at length, as Albert has done so, and
I think has given a very _fair_ view of the state of affairs. Let
me only repeat to you again that you need not be alarmed, and that I
think you will be pleased and _beruhigt_ when you talk to our friend
Lord Melbourne on the subject...

I fear you will again see nothing of the Season, as Parliament will
probably be dissolved by the 21st....

As to my letters, dear Uncle, I beg to _assure_ you (for Lord
Palmerston was _most indignant_ at the doubt when I once asked) that
_none_ of our letters nor any of those _coming_ to us, are ever opened
at the Foreign Office. My letters to Brussels and Paris are _quite
safe_, and all those to Germany, which are of any _real_ consequence,
I always send through Rothschild, which is perfectly _safe_ and very
quick.

We are, and so is _everybody here_, so charmed with Mme. Rachel;[50]
she is perfect, _et puis_, such a nice modest girl; she is going to
declaim at Windsor Castle on Monday evening.

Now adieu in haste. Believe me, always, your very devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Really Leopold _must_ come, or I shall _never_ forgive you.

    [Footnote 50: The young French actress, who made her _début_
    in England on 4th May as Hermione in Racine's _Andromaque._
    She was received with great enthusiasm.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _8th June 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is quite
well, and has nothing particular to relate to your Majesty, at least
nothing that presses; except that he is commissioned by Lord John
Russell respectfully to acquaint your Majesty that his marriage is
settled, and will take place shortly.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

Does Lord Melbourne _really_ mean J. Russell's _marriage_? and to
whom?




[Pageheading: VISIT TO NUNEHAM]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

The Lady Fanny Eliot.[51] Lord Melbourne did not name her before, nor
does not now, because he did not remember her Christian name.

    [Footnote 51: Daughter of Lord Minto. Lord Melbourne
    originally wrote _The Lady ---- Eliot_ at the head of his
    letter (spelling the surname wrong, which should be Elliot).
    The word "Fanny" is written in subsequently to the completion
    of the letter.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

NUNEHAM,[52] _15th June 1841._

Affairs go on, and all will take some shape or other, but it keeps one
in hot water all the time. In the meantime, however, the people are
in the best possible humour, and I never was better received at Ascot,
which is a great test, and also along the roads yesterday. This is a
most lovely place; pleasure grounds in the style of Claremont, only
much larger, and with the river Thames winding along beneath them, and
Oxford in the distance; a beautiful flower and kitchen garden, and all
kept up in perfect order. I followed Albert here, faithful to my word,
and he is gone to Oxford[53] for the whole day, to my great grief.
And here I am all alone in a strange house, with not even Lehzen as
a companion, in Albert's absence, but I thought she and also Lord
Gardner,[54] and some gentlemen should remain with little Victoria for
the first time. But it is rather a trial for me.

I must take leave, and beg you to believe me always, your most devoted
Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 52: The house of Edward Vernon Harcourt, Archbishop
    of York.]

    [Footnote 53: To receive an address at Commemoration.]

    [Footnote 54: Alan Legge, third and last Lord Gardner
    (1810-1883) was one of the Queen's first Lords-in-Waiting.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE VISITS OXFORD]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _16th June 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has just
received your Majesty's letter, and will wait upon your Majesty at
half-past five. Lord Melbourne is sorry to hear that your Majesty has
been at all indisposed. It will suit him much better to wait upon
your Majesty at dinner to-morrow than to-day, as his hand shows some
disposition to gather, and it may be well to take care of it.

Lord Melbourne is very glad to learn that everything went off well at
Oxford. Lord Melbourne expected that the Duke of Sutherland[55] would
not entirely escape a little public animadversion. Nothing can be
more violent or outrageous than the conduct of the students of
both Universities upon such occasions; the worst and lowest mobs
of Westminster and London are very superior to them in decency and
forbearance.

The Archbishop[56] is a very agreeable man; but he is not without
cunning, and Lord Melbourne can easily understand his eagerness that
the Queen should not prorogue Parliament in person. He knows that it
will greatly assist the Tories. It is not true that it is universal
for the Sovereign to go down upon such occasions. George III. went
himself in 1784; he did not go in 1807, because he had been prevented
from doing so by his infirmities for three years before. William IV.
went down himself in 1830.[57]

Lord Melbourne sends a note which he has received from Lord Normanby
upon this and another subject.

    [Footnote 55: Who was, of course, associated with the Whig
    Ministry.]

    [Footnote 56: Archbishop Vernon Harcourt, of York, the Queen's
    host.]

    [Footnote 57: The Queen prorogued Parliament in person on 22nd
    June.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _17th June 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--A few lines I must write to you to express to you
my _very great_ delight at the certainty, God willing, of seeing you
all _three_ next week, and to express a hope, and a _great hope_, that
you will try and arrive a little earlier on Wednesday.... I must again
repeat I am so sorry you should come when Society is dispersed and at
sixes and sevens, and in such a state that naturally I cannot at the
moment of the elections invite many Tories, as that _tells_ so at the
elections. But we shall try and do our best to make it as little dull
as we can, and you will kindly take the will for the deed.

We came back from Nuneham yesterday afternoon. Albert came back
at half-past five on Tuesday from Oxford, where he had been
enthusiastically received, but the students ... had the bad taste to
show their party feeling in groans and hisses when the name of a
Whig was mentioned, which they ought not to have done in my husband's
presence.

I must now conclude, begging you ever to believe me, your devoted
Niece,

VICTORIA R.

My Coiffeur will be quite at Louise's disposal, and he can _coiffer_
in any way she likes, if her dresser tells him how she wishes it.




[Pageheading: LORD BROUGHAM]

[Pageheading: LETTER FROM LORD BROUGHAM]


_Lord Brougham to Queen Victoria._[58]

GRAFTON STREET, _19th June 1841._

MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,--I crave leave humbly to approach your
Majesty and to state in writing what I should have submitted to your
Royal consideration at an Audience, because I conceive that this
course will be attended with less inconvenience to your Majesty.

In the counsel which I ventured with great humility, but with an
entire conviction of its soundness, to tender, I cannot be biassed by
any personal interest, for I am not a candidate for office; nor by any
Parliamentary interest, for I have no concern with elections; nor by
any factious interest, for I am unconnected with party. My only
motive is to discharge the duty which I owe to both the Crown and the
country. Nor am I under the influence of any prejudice against your
Majesty's servants or their measures; for I charge your Majesty's
servants with nothing beyond an error, a great error, in judgment, and
I entirely approve of the measures which they have lately propounded
(with a single exception partially applicable to one of them), while I
lament and disapprove of the time and manner of propounding them, both
on account of the Government and of the measures themselves.

I feel myself, Madam, under the necessity of stating that the
dissolution of the Parliament appears to me wholly without
justification, either from principle or from policy. They who advise
it must needs proceed upon the supposition that a majority will be
returned favourable to the continuance of the present Administration
and favourable to their lately announced policy. On no other ground is
it possible that any such advice should be tendered to your Majesty.
For no one could ever think of such a proceeding as advising the
Crown to dissolve the Parliament in order to increase the force of the
Opposition to its own future Ministers, thus perverting to the mere
purposes of party the exercise of by far the most eminent of the Royal
prerogatives; and I pass over as wholly unworthy of notice the only
other supposition which can with any decency be made, when there is
no conflict between the two Houses, namely, that of a dissolution
in entire ignorance of the national opinion and for the purpose of
ascertaining to which side it inclines. Your Majesty's advisers must,
therefore, have believed, and they must still believe, that a majority
will be returned favourable both to themselves and their late policy.
I, on the other hand, have the most entire conviction that there will
be a considerable majority against them, and against their policy a
majority larger still, many of their supporters having already joined
to swell that majority. Whoever examines the details of the case
must be satisfied that the very best result which the Government can
possibly hope for is a narrow majority against them--an event which
must occasion a second dissolution by whatever Ministry may succeed
to the confidence of your Majesty. But those best acquainted with
the subject have no doubt at all that the majority will be much more
considerable.

I beg leave, Madam, humbly to represent to your Majesty, in my own
vindication for not having laid my opinion before your Majesty as
soon as I returned from the Continent, that when I first heard of
the course taken by the Government early in May, I formed the opinion
which I now entertain, but conceived that I must have mistaken the
facts upon which they were acting; and when I arrived twelve days ago
I was confirmed in the belief (seeing the fixed resolution taken to
dissolve) that I must have been under an erroneous impression as to
the probable results of the elections. But I have since found ample
reason for believing that my original conviction was perfectly well
founded, and that no grounds whatever exist sufficient to make any
one who considers the subject calmly, and without the bias of either
interest or prejudice, really believe that this ill-fated proceeding
can have any other result than lasting injury to your Majesty's
service, to the progress of sound and just views of policy, and to
the influence of those in whom the Crown and the country alike should
repose confidence.

That a number of short-sighted persons whose judgments are warped by
exclusive attention to a single subject, or by personal feelings, or
by party views (and these narrow and erroneous), may have been loudly
clamorous for the course apparently about to be pursued, is extremely
possible, and affords no kind of excuse for it. Many of these will be
the slowest to defend what they have so unfortunately called for; some
will be among the first to condemn it when a manifest failure shall
have taken place, and general discomfiture shall throw a few local
successes into the shade.

My advice is humbly offered to your Majesty, as removed far above such
confined and factious views; as the parent of all your people; as both
bound and willing to watch over their true interests; and as charged
by virtue of your exalted office with the preservation of the public
peace, the furtherance of the prosperity, and the maintenance of the
liberties of your subjects.

I am, with profound respect, Madam, your Majesty's faithful and
dutiful Subject,

BROUGHAM.[59]

    [Footnote 58: Mention has been made earlier of the resentment
    which Brougham cherished against his late colleagues, after
    his exclusion from the Whig Cabinet, and this letter, on the
    proposal to dissolve Parliament, was, no doubt, prompted by
    that feeling.]

    [Footnote 59: Parliament, however, notwithstanding this
    rescript of Lord Brougham, was dissolved, and the Ministry
    went to the country with the cry of a fixed duty on corn, as
    against a sliding scale, and they attacked, as monopolists, at
    once the landowner, who enjoyed protection for his wheat,
    and the West Indian proprietor, who profited by the duty on
    foreign sugar. The Conservatives impugned the general
    policy of the Whig Administration. The result, a majority of
    seventy-six, was an even greater Conservative triumph than the
    most sanguine of the party anticipated.--_See_ Introductory
    Note, _ante_, p. 253. (Intro Note to Ch. X)]




[Pageheading: VISIT TO WOBURN]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WOBURN ABBEY, _27th July 1841._

Arrived here last night with the Prince and the Queen; this is now
the second expedition (Nuneham being the first) which Her Majesty has
taken, and on neither occasion has the Baroness accompanied us.

The Prince went yesterday through a review of the many steps he had
made to his present position--all within eighteen months from the
marriage. Those who intended to keep him from being useful to
the Queen, from the fear that he might ambitiously touch upon her
prerogatives, have been completely foiled; they thought they had
prevented Her Majesty from yielding anything of importance to him by
creating distrust through imaginary alarm. The Queen's good sense,
however, has seen that the Prince has no other object in all he seeks
but a means to Her Majesty's good. The Court from highest to lowest is
brought to a proper sense of the position of the Queen's husband.
The country has marked its confidence in his character by passing the
Regency Bill _nem. con._ The Queen finds the value of an active right
hand and able head to support her and to resort to for advice in time
of need. Cabinet Ministers treat him with deference and respect. Arts
and science look up to him as their especial patron, and they find
this encouragement supported by a full knowledge of the details of
every subject. The good and the wise look up to him with pride and
gratitude as giving an example, so rarely shown in such a station, of
leading a virtuous and religious life.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _3rd August 1841._

... Our little tour was most successful, and we enjoyed it of all
things; nothing could be more enthusiastic or affectionate than our
reception _everywhere_, and I am happy to hear that our presence has
left a favourable impression, which I think will be of great use.
The loyalty in this country is certainly _very striking_. We enjoyed
Panshanger[60] still more than Woburn; the country is quite beautiful,
and the house so pretty and _wohnlich_; the picture-gallery and
pictures very splendid. The Cowpers are such good people too. The
visit to Brocket naturally interested us very much for our excellent
Lord Melbourne's sake. The park and grounds are beautiful.

I can't admit the Duke of Bedford[61] ever was radical; God knows! I
wish everybody now was a little so! What _is_ to come hangs over me
like a baneful dream, as you will easily understand, and when I am
often happy and merry, comes and damps it all![62]

But God's will be done! and it is for our best, we _must_ feel, though
we can't feel it. I can't say _how_ much we think of our little visit
to you, God willing, next year. You will kindly let our good old
Grandmother[63] come there to see her dear Albert _once again_ before
she dies, wouldn't you? And you would get the Nemours to come? And
you would persuade the dear Queen[64] to come for a little while with
Clémentine?

Now farewell! Believe me, always, your most devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 60: The house of Earl Cowper.]

    [Footnote 61: The Duke, who had formerly been M.P. for
    Bedfordshire, was inclined to go further in the direction of
    Reform than Lord John, yet he applauded the latter's attitude
    on the occasion of the speech which earned him the nickname of
    "Finality Jack."]

    [Footnote 62: Alluding to the Ministerial defeat at the
    polls.]

    [Footnote 63: The Dowager Duchess of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg.]

    [Footnote 64: Marie Amélie, Queen of the French.]




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE AND THE GARTER]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _7th August 1841._

I went to Lord Melbourne this morning in his room as he had desired
me. He said: "The Prince has been urging me to accept the Blue Riband
before I quit office, and I wished to tell you that I am very anxious
that this should not be pressed upon me by the Queen; it may be a
foolish weakness on my part, but I wish to quit office without having
any honour conferred upon me; the Queen's confidence towards me is
sufficiently known without any public mark of this nature. I have
always disregarded these honours, and there would be an inconsistency
in my accepting this. I feel it to be much better for my reputation
that I should not have it forced upon me. Mr Pitt never accepted
an order, and only the Cinque Ports on being pressed to do so. Lord
Grenville accepted a peerage, but never any other honour or advantage,
and I wish to be permitted to retire in like manner. If I was a poor
man, I should have no hesitation in receiving money in the shape of
place or pension; I _only don't wish_ for place, because I do not
_want_ it."

In the course of conversation Lord Melbourne said that he considered
it very improbable that he should ever again form a part of any
Administration.

He did not think that a violent course was at all to be apprehended
from Lord John Russell; he said Lord John had been far more of a
"finality" man than he had, and in the Cabinet had always been averse
to violent change. He added, "I think you are in error in forming the
opinion which you have of him."

Lord Melbourne thought the Queen very much disliked being talked _at_
upon religion; she particularly disliked what Her Majesty termed a
_Sunday face_, but yet that it was a subject far more thought of and
reflected upon than was [thought to be?] the case.





[Pageheading: A DREADED MOMENT]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _15th August 1841._

... Lord Melbourne well knows the feeling which your Majesty
describes. The expectation of an event which is dreaded and
deprecated, and yet felt to be certain and imminent, presents itself
continually to the mind and recurs at every moment, and particularly
in moments of satisfaction and enjoyment. It is perhaps no consolation
to be told that events of this nature are necessary and incidental to
your Majesty's high situation, but Lord Melbourne anxiously hopes that
the change, when it does take place, will not be found so grievous
as your Majesty anticipates, and your Majesty may rely that Lord
Melbourne will do everything in his power to reconcile it to your
Majesty's feelings.





_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _17th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear of the Princess's tooth.

Lord Melbourne is much obliged to your Majesty for informing him about
the mourning.

He is quite well and will be ready when your Majesty sends.




_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _23rd August 1841._

Lord John Russell was staying at the Castle, and asked to-day for an
audience of Her Majesty, and was closeted for a long time. The Prince
asked Her Majesty what Lord John came for. The Queen said he came
about several things, but particularly he wished to impress upon the
Queen that Her Majesty should not allow Sir Robert Peel to propose any
new Grants in Parliament, as they (the Whigs) could not well oppose
it, and this being felt, the whole unpopularity would fall upon the
Queen's person. An idea existed that the Tories were always jobbing
with money, and the grant for the building the new stables at Windsor
had shown how suspicious people were.

Lord John did not speak clearly out, but on consultation with Lord
Melbourne the Queen thought Lord John must have alluded to Peel having
spoken equivocally at the end of his speech relative to the Prince's
annuity, and would now probably propose a further grant, and would say
the time was now come in order to stand well with the Queen. The Queen
replied that she would never allow such a thing to be proposed and
that it would be a disgrace to owe any favour to that Party.

The only answer the Prince gave was that these views were _very
agreeable_ for him.




[Pageheading: A CARRIAGE ACCIDENT]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _24th August 1841._

... Our accident[65] was not so very bad, and considering that it is
the _very first_ that had happened in the course of _five summers_,
with _so many_ carriages and horses, one cannot be surprised. I
beg leave also to say that I _can_ get out _very_ quick. I am very
thankful that you agree to the couriers. I am a little sorry that you
have put poor Mamma off _so_ late, as she is _very_ much hurt at it, I
fear, by what I hear, and accuses me of it. But that will, I trust,
be forgiven. You don't say that _you_ sympathise with me in my present
heavy trial,[66] the heaviest I have ever had to endure, and which
will be a sad heartbreaking to me--but I know you do feel for me. I am
quiet and prepared, but still I fell very _sad_, and God knows! very
wretched at times, for myself and my country, that _such_ a change
must take place. But God in His mercy will support and guide me
through all. Yet I feel that my constant headaches are caused by
annoyance and vexation!

Adieu, dearest Uncle! God bless you! Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 65: The Queen had driven to Virginia Water to see
    Prince Albert's beagles hunting, when owing to the hounds
    running between the horses' legs and frightening them, a pony
    phaeton and four containing Lord Erroll, Lady Ida Hay, and
    Miss Cavendish was upset. One of the postillions was (not
    dangerously) hurt.]

    [Footnote 66: _I.e._, Lord Melbourne being succeeded by Sir
    Robert Peel as Prime Minister.]




[Pageheading: DEBATE ON THE ADDRESS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _24th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. We have
just delivered the Speech in the House of Lords, and the debate will
commence at five o'clock. We understand that the amendment is to be a
repetition of the motion of want of confidence, which Sir Robert Peel
made in the House of Commons before the dissolution, and nearly in the
same terms. It is to be moved by Lord Ripon[67] in the House of
Lords, and by Mr. Stuart Wortley[68] in the House of Commons. It is
understood to be their intention to avoid, as much as possible, debate
upon the Corn Laws, and upon the other topics in the Speech, and to
place the question entirely upon the result of the General Election
and the proof which that affords that the Ministry does not possess
the confidence of the country. Lord Melbourne thinks that it will not
be found easy to repress debate in the House of Commons, but would not
be surprised if the course which it is intended to pursue should much
shorten it in the House of Lords. Lord Melbourne will write again to
your Majesty after the debate, and will certainly come down to-morrow,
unless anything unexpected should occur to prevent him.

It will be necessary to receive the address of the Convocation in some
manner or another. Lord Melbourne will write confidentially to the
Archbishop[69] to learn how it may be received in the quietest manner
and with the least trouble. Lord Melbourne has little doubt that the
Lords and Commons will send their addresses by the officers of the
Household.

Lord Melbourne entreats your Majesty to pick up your spirits.

    [Footnote 67: The first Earl (1782-1859) who had, as Lord
    Goderich, been Premier in 1827-1828.]

    [Footnote 68: J. Stuart Wortley (1801-1855), M.P. for the West
    Riding, afterwards the second Lord Wharncliffe.]

    [Footnote 69: Dr Howley.]




[Pageheading: COBDEN'S SPEECH]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _26th August 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that nothing remarkable occurred in the debate
of yesterday, except a powerful speech from Mr Cobden, a
manufacturer.[70]

The debate will probably close this evening. No one of the Tory
leaders, except Sir Robert Peel, appears disposed to speak.

Should the Address be voted to-night, and reported to-morrow, it may be
presented to your Majesty by Lord Marcus Hill[71] on Saturday.

But should the debate be continued over this night, the report of the
Address can hardly take place till Monday. This, however, is not very
likely.

    [Footnote 70: Cobden had just been elected for the first time
    for Stockport.]

    [Footnote 71: Son of Lord Downshire, and M.P. for Evesham;
    afterwards (under a special remainder) the third Lord Sandys.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _27th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Upon his
arrival he found that there was no precedent of the House meeting
again after an Address, without receiving an answer from the Crown.
Lord Erroll therefore delivered the answer in the terms which had been
submitted by Lord Melbourne to your Majesty, and it appeared to give
satisfaction. The debate will probably terminate in the House of
Commons to-night; at the same time it may not. If it does we must
place our resignation in your Majesty's hands on Saturday, and it must
be announced to the Houses of Parliament on Monday. Your Majesty
will then do well not to delay sending for some other person beyond
Tuesday. Lord Melbourne will write to your Majesty more fully upon all
these subjects to-morrow, when he will know the result of the night's
debate, and be able more surely to point out the course of events.

Lord Melbourne received the Eau-de-Cologne, and returns your Majesty
many thanks for it.

Lord Melbourne understands that the Duke of Wellington is, in fact,
very desirous of having the Foreign Seals,[72] and that if your
Majesty feels any preference for him in that department the slightest
intimation of your Majesty's wish in that respect will fix him in his
desire to have it.

    [Footnote 72: The Duke had been Foreign Secretary in 1835.]




[Pageheading: AN OVERWHELMING MAJORITY]


_Lord John Russell to Queen Victoria._

WILTON CRESCENT, _28th August 1841._

Lord John Russell presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has
the honour to report that the Amendment to the Address was carried by
91, the numbers being--

  For the Address         269
  For the Amendment       360
                          ---
                           91
                          ---

The Tory party proposed that the House should meet this day, and the
Speaker signified that he should take the Chair at twelve o'clock. The
Address will be carried to Windsor by Lord Marcus Hill this evening if
then ready.

Lord John Russell takes this opportunity of closing his Reports again,
to express to your Majesty his deep sense of your Majesty's goodness
towards him. It is his fervent prayer that your Majesty may enjoy a
long and happy reign.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _28th August 1841._

... Your Majesty must, of course, consider us as having tendered
our resignations immediately after the vote of last night, and your
Majesty will probably think it right to request us to continue to hold
our offices and transact the current business until our successors are
appointed.

Lord Melbourne will have the honour of writing again to your Majesty
in the course of the day.




[Pageheading: THE RESIGNATION]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _28th August 1841._

... Albert will not stay for the dinner, and I expect him back at
about eleven to-night. He went at half-past eleven this morning. It is
the first time that we have ever been separated for so long since our
marriage, and I am quite melancholy about it.

You will forgive me if I mention it to you, but I understand that the
Queen Dowager has been somewhat offended at your not taking leave of
her when she came here, and at your not answering her, when she
wrote to you. Perhaps you would write to her and soften and smoothen
matters. She did not the least expect you to come to her. Believe me
always, your most devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _28th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
acknowledge gratefully the communication which he has just received
from your Majesty. Lord Melbourne feels certain that your Majesty's
sense and firmness will enable your Majesty to bear up under this
which your Majesty names a severe trial. The kindness of your
Majesty's expressions emboldens Lord Melbourne to say that he also
feels deeply the pain of separation from a service, which has now for
four years and more been no less his pleasure than his pride.

Lord Melbourne would have been anxious to have waited upon your
Majesty to-day, but he feels that his presence is in some degree
material at a meeting, at which not only the present situation of your
Majesty's servants, but also their future conduct and prospects, will
be considered.

Lord Melbourne is sure that your Majesty will at once perceive that
it would not have a good appearance if he were to return to Windsor
immediately after having announced his resignation to the House of
Lords on Monday next.

It is right that there should be no appearance of delay or of
unwillingness to carry into effect the wishes of both Houses of
Parliament, and, therefore, your Majesty will forgive Lord Melbourne
if he suggests that it would be well if your Majesty could make up
your mind to appoint Sir R. Peel on Monday next, so that there might
be as little delay as possible in the formation of a new Government.
On all accounts, and particularly on account of the lateness of
the Season, it is desirable that this should be done as speedily as
possible.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_29th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He knows
well what that feeling of working under the impression of trouble and
annoyance is, but if the first gloom is brushed away, confidence and
hope and spirits return, and things begin to appear more cheerful.
Lord Melbourne is much obliged by your Majesty's enquiries. He slept
well, but waked early, which he always does now, and which is a sure
sign of anxiety of mind.

Lord Melbourne will be ready to attend your Majesty at any time.




[Pageheading: DELAY UNDESIRABLE]

[Pageheading: PARTING WITH LORD MELBOURNE]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _29th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne is to take his farewell audience of the Queen
to-morrow, and Her Majesty has appointed Sir Robert Peel to come down
here at three o'clock to-morrow.

I went with Lord Melbourne from luncheon to his room. He seemed in
tolerable spirits, though somewhat sad when he alluded to taking leave
of the Queen. He said he was anxious that Her Majesty should lose no
time in writing to appoint Sir Robert Peel to be here to-morrow, for
though he was not afraid of Sir Robert taking affront, his Party would
be too ready to construe any delay on the Queen's part into a slight.
He said the Prince had been with him just before, and amongst other
things had urged him to continue to him and to the Queen his advice
and assistance, especially on measures affecting their private
concerns and family concerns; he told Lord Melbourne it was on these
points that he felt Lord Melbourne's advice had been peculiarly sound,
and there was no reason why this should not be continued, and any
communication might be made through me. Lord Melbourne said that
the Prince had also entered upon the subject of the Baroness, and
expressed the constant state of annoyance he was kept in by her
interference. Lord Melbourne said to me: "It will be far more
difficult to remove her after the change of Government than now,
because if pressed to do it by a Tory Minister, the Queen's prejudice
would be immediately aroused." I admitted this, but said that though
the Prince felt that if he pressed the point against the Baroness
remaining, he should be able to carry it, still his good feeling and
affection for the Queen prevented him from pressing what he knew would
be painful, and what could not be carried without an exciting scene;
he must remain on his guard, and patiently abide the result. People
were beginning much better to understand that lady's character, and
time must surely work its own ends.

On my being sent for by the Prince, Lord Melbourne said, "I shall
see you again before I take my leave." I was much affected by the
earnestness with which this was said, and said I would certainly be
with him before he saw the Queen to-morrow.

The Prince said that Her Majesty was cheerful and in good spirits,
and the only part of the approaching scene which he dreaded was
the farewell with Lord Melbourne. The Queen had, however, been much
relieved by the Prince arranging for her hearing from Lord Melbourne
whenever she wished it.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_30th August 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
your Majesty much for the very clever and interesting etchings which
your Majesty most kindly sent him yesterday evening. Lord Melbourne
will ever treasure them as remembrances of your Majesty's kindness and
regard, which he prizes beyond measure.

They will, as your Majesty says, certainly recall to recollection a
melancholy day, but still Lord Melbourne hopes and trusts that with
the divine blessing it will hereafter be looked back upon with less
grief and bitterness of feeling, than it must be regarded at present.




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE'S POSITION]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _30th August 1841._

Directly I got here this morning the Prince sent for me, and said he
had been made somewhat uneasy by a conversation he had just had with
the Queen. Her Majesty said that after the manner in which the Tories
had treated the Prince (relative to annuity) he ought now to keep them
at a distance. She said they would try to flatter him, and would all
come to see him; this he should resist, and should refuse to see them,
at all events for some time.

The Prince wished me to mention this to Lord Melbourne when I went to
take leave of him, and to urge Lord Melbourne to set this right with
the Queen by his advice before he parted with the Queen, reminding him
that his view had always been that from this moment the Prince would
take up a new position, and that the Queen, no longer having Lord
Melbourne to resort to in case of need, must from this moment consult
and advise with the Prince. That Lord Melbourne should urge the Queen
to have no scruple in employing the Prince, and showing that unless
a proper understanding existed from the first, he in attempting to do
good would be easily misrepresented.

I found Lord Melbourne alone in his dressing-room and put this case
before him. He said he had always thought that when he left the
service of the Queen the Prince would of necessity be brought forward,
and must render great assistance to the Queen; and the Queen's
confidence in his judgment having so much increased, this consequence
was the more natural. The Prince must, however, be very cautious at
first, and in a little time he would fall into it. He must be
very careful not to alarm the Queen, by Her Majesty for an instant
supposing that the Prince was carrying on business with Peel without
her cognisance.

If it were possible for any one to advise Peel, he would recommend
that he should write fully to Her Majesty, and _elementarily_, as Her
Majesty always liked to have full knowledge upon everything which was
going on. He would advise the Queen to be cautious in giving a verbal
decision, that she should not allow herself to be _driven into a
corner_, and forced to decide where she felt her mind was not made up
and required reflection.

Peel should be very careful that intelligence came first from him
direct. King William was very particular upon this point, so was the
Queen.

I asked Lord Melbourne if he had considered the future position of
himself with the Queen, and also of Peel with the Queen. He said he
owned he had not and would avoid entering into any discussion--he felt
sure that he should be regarded with extreme jealousy, not so much by
Peel as by the party. He would be looked upon as Lord Bute had been in
his relation to George III.,--always suspected of secret
intercourse and intrigue. He would make me the medium of any written
communication.

With regard to Peel's position with the Queen, he thought that
circumstances must make it. He thought the Queen must see him oftener
than King William did him, as he thought the present state of things
would require more frequent intercourse. The late King used to see
him once a week after the Levée, seldom oftener; all the rest of the
business was transacted by correspondence, but this mode, though it
had its merits in some respect, very much impeded the public business.

The less personal objections the Queen took to any one the better, as
any such expression is sure to come out and a personal enemy is
made. It was also to be recollected that Peel was in a very different
position now, backed by a large majority, to when the other overture
was made. He had the power _now_ to extort what he pleased, and he
fancied he saw the blank faces of the heads of the Party when Peel
told them that he had agreed to the dismissal or resignation of only
three of the Queen's ladies.

Lord Melbourne said the Queen was afraid she never could be at ease
with Peel, because his manner was so embarrassed, and that conveyed
embarrassment also to her, which it would be very difficult to get
over.

The Queen took leave of Lord Melbourne to-day. Her Majesty was much
affected, but soon recovered her calmness.

Peel had his first audience at half-past three o'clock.




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE'S OPINION OF THE PRINCE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_30th August 1841_ (6 P.M.).

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. The
announcement has been made in both Houses of Parliament. A few words
were said by Lord Stanley[73] in the House of Commons, and nothing in
the House of Lords.

Lord Melbourne cannot satisfy himself without again stating to your
Majesty in writing what he had the honour of saying to your Majesty
respecting his Royal Highness the Prince. Lord Melbourne has formed
the highest opinion of His Royal Highness's judgment, temper, and
discretion, and he cannot but feel a great consolation and security
in the reflection that he leaves your Majesty in a situation in
which your Majesty has the inestimable advantage of such advice and
assistance. Lord Melbourne feels certain that your Majesty cannot do
better than have recourse to it, whenever it is needed, and rely upon
it with confidence.

Lord Melbourne will be anxious to hear from your Majesty as to what
has passed with Sir R. Peel. Your Majesty will, Lord Melbourne is
sure, feel that the same general secrecy which your Majesty has always
observed respecting public affairs is more particularly necessary at
the present moment.

Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes that your Majesty is well and composed,
and with the most anxious wishes for your Majesty's welfare and
happiness, remains ever your Majesty's most devoted and attached
Servant, and he trusts that he may add, without presumption, your
Majesty's faithful and affectionate Friend.

    [Footnote 73: Who now became Colonial Secretary.]




[Pageheading: THE HOUSEHOLD]


_Memorandum: Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

Your Majesty might say, if to your Majesty it seems good, that in
consequence of the Addresses voted by both Houses of Parliament, your
Majesty's servants had tendered their resignations, and that for the
same reason your Majesty had accepted those resignations. That your
Majesty's present servants possessed your Majesty's confidence,
and that you only parted with them in deference to the opinion of
Parliament.

That your Majesty naturally had recourse to Sir Robert Peel as
possessing the confidence of the great Party which constitutes the
majority of both Houses, and that you were prepared to empower him to
form an Administration.

That your Majesty did not conceive that the giving him this commission
of itself empowered him to advise the removal of the officers of your
Majesty's Household; that you conceive that all that the Constitution
required was that the Sovereign's Household should support the
Sovereign's Ministers; but that you were prepared to place at his
disposal, and to take his advice upon all the offices of the Household
at present filled by members of either House of Parliament, with
the exception of those whom your Majesty might think proper to
name, _i.e._, Lord Byron[74]--and it should be understood that this
exception was not to extend further than to him.

If Sir Robert Peel should wish that in case of Lord Byron's remaining
it should be considered as a fresh appointment made by his advice,
this wish might properly be acceded to.

_The Ladies._--If any difficulty should arise it may be asked to be
stated in writing, and reserved for consideration. But it is of great
importance that Sir Robert Peel should return to London with full
power to form an Administration. Such must be the final result, and
the more readily and graciously it is acquiesced in the better.

Your Majesty must take care not to be driven to the wall, and to
be put into a situation in which it is necessary to Aye or No. No
positive objection should be taken either to men or measures.

It must be recollected that at the time of the negotiation in 1839
Lord Melbourne and Lord John Russell were still at the head of a
majority in the House of Commons. This is not the case now.

    [Footnote 74: George Anson, seventh Lord Byron (1789-1868),
    cousin and successor of the poet.]




[Pageheading: THE NEW CABINET]


THE CABINET OF LORD MELBOURNE,

_As it stood in September 1841._

  _First Lord of the Treasury_             VISCOUNT MELBOURNE.

  _Lord Chancellor_                        LORD (afterwards Earl of)
                                                COTTENHAM.
  _Chancellor of the Exchequer_            Mr FRANCIS BARING
                                           (afterwards Lord Northbrook).
  _Lord President of the Council_          MARQUIS OF LANSDOWNE.
  _Lord Privy Seal_                        EARL OF CLARENDON.
  _Home Secretary_                         MARQUIS OF NORMANBY.
  _Foreign Secretary_                      VISCOUNT PALMERSTON.
  _Colonial Secretary_                     LORD JOHN (afterwards
                                                      Earl) RUSSELL.
  _First Lord of the Admiralty_            EARL OF MINTO.
  _President of the Board of Control_      Sir JOHN CAM HOBHOUSE
                                           (afterwards Lord Broughton).
  _Secretary at War_                       Mr T. B. (afterwards
                                                      Lord) MACAULAY.
  _President of the Board of Trade_        Mr LABOUCHERE (afterwards
                                                        Lord Taunton).
  _Chief Secretary for Ireland_            VISCOUNT MORPETH
                                          (afterwards Earl of Carlisle).
  _First Commissioner of Land Revenue_     VISCOUNT DUNCANNON
                                          (afterwards Earl of Bessborough).
  _Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster_   Sir GEORGE GREY.


THE CABINET OF SIR ROBERT PEEL,[75]

_As formed in September 1841._

  _First Lord of the Treasury_             Sir ROBERT PEEL.
  _Lord Chancellor_                        LORD LYNDHURST.
  _Chancellor of the Exchequer_            Mr. H. GOULBURN.
  (_Without Office_)                       DUKE OF WELLINGTON.
  _Lord President of the Council_          LORD WHARNCLIFFE.
  _Lord Privy Seal_                        DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.
  _Home Secretary_                         Sir JAMES GRAHAM.
  _Foreign Secretary_                      EARL OF ABERDEEN.
  _Colonial Secretary_                     LORD STANLEY
                                           (afterwards Earl of Derby).
  _First Lord of the Admiralty_            EARL OF HADDINGTON.
  _President of the Board of Control_      LORD (afterwards Earl of)
                                               ELLENBOROUGH
  _Secretary at War_                       Sir HENRY (afterwards
                                            Viscount) HARDINGE.
  _President of the Board of Trade_        EARL OF RIPON.
  _Paymaster-General_.                     Sir EDWARD KNATCHBULL.


    [Footnote 75: The Peel Ministry of 1841 was unique in
    containing three ex-Premiers: Sir Robert Peel himself, the
    Earl of Ripon, and the Duke of Wellington, who succeeded Lord
    Goderich as Premier in 1828. Ripon's career was a curious one;
    he was a singularly ineffective Prime Minister, and indeed did
    not, during the course of his Ministry (August 1827-January
    1828), ever have to meet Parliament. He was disappointed
    at not being invited to join the Wellington Ministry,
    subsequently joined the Reform Ministry of Lord Grey, but
    followed Lord Stanley, Sir James Graham, and the Duke of
    Richmond out of it. In August 1841 he moved the vote of want
    of confidence in the Melbourne Ministry, and became President
    of the Board of Trade in Peel's Government. In 1846 it fell to
    him, when President of the Board of Control, to move the Corn
    Law Repeal Bill in the Lords.

    The only later instance of an ex-Premier accepting a
    subordinate office was in the case of Lord John Russell, who,
    in 1852, took the Foreign Office under Aberdeen, subsequently
    vacating the office and sitting in the Cabinet without office.
    In June 1854, he became Lord President of the Council, and
    left the Ministry when it was menaced by Roebuck's motion.
    When Lord Palmerston formed a Ministry in 1855, Lord John,
    after an interval, became Colonial Secretary, again resigning
    in five months. Finally, in 1859, he went back to the Foreign
    Office, where he remained until he succeeded Palmerston as
    Premier in 1865.

    The Government also contained three future Premiers, Aberdeen,
    Stanley, and Gladstone.]



[Pageheading: INTERVIEW WITH PEEL]

[Pageheading: HOUSEHOLD APPOINTMENTS]

[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S DISTRESS]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE _30th August 1841._

... The first interview with Sir Robert Peel has gone off well, and
only lasted twenty minutes; and he sends the Queen to-morrow, in
writing, the proposed arrangements, and will only come down on
Wednesday morning. He first wished to come to-morrow, but on the
Queen's saying that he need not to do that, but might send it and only
come down Wednesday, he thought the Queen might prefer having it to
consider a little, which she said she certainly should, though she
meant no want of confidence. The Queen, in the first instance, stated
that she concluded he was prepared for her sending for him, and then
stated exactly what Lord Melbourne wrote, viz., the resignation having
taken place in consequence of the Addresses--the Queen's great regret
at parting with her present Ministers--the confidence she had in them,
and her only acceding in consequence of the Addresses in Parliament,
and then that consequently she looked to him (Sir Robert Peel) as
possessing the confidence of both Houses of Parliament to form an
Administration. He made many protestations of his sorrow, at what must
give pain to the Queen (as she said to him it did), but of course said
he accepted the task. The Duke of Wellington's health too uncertain,
and himself too prone to sleep coming over him--as Peel expressed
it--to admit of his taking an office in which he would have much to
do, but to be in the Cabinet, which the Queen expressed her wish he
should. He named Lord De Grey[76] as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
and Lord Eliot[77] as Secretary for Ireland, who, he said, were both
moderate people. The Queen said she gave up to him the officers of
State and those of her Household who were in Parliament, and he then
asked if Lord Liverpool would be agreeable as Lord Steward (the Queen
said he would), and if she would object to Lord Jersey as Master of
the Horse (she said she would not), as she believed he understood it
perfectly. He said he was so anxious to do everything which could be
agreeable to the Queen, that he wished her to name whom she should
like as Lord Chamberlain; she said he might suggest some one, but as
he would not, and pressed the Queen to name whoever she pleased,
she said she should like the Duke of Rutland, and he said he would
certainly name it to him. The Queen said that Lord Melbourne had
always been very particular to name no one who might be disagreeable
to her in the Household, and Sir R. Peel said he felt this, and
should be most anxious to do what could be agreeable to me and for my
comfort, and that he would even sacrifice any advantage to this. The
Queen mentioned the three Ladies' resignation, and her wish not to
fill up the three Ladies' places immediately. She mentioned Lady
Byron,[78] to which he agreed immediately, and then said, as I had
alluded to those communications, he hoped that he had been understood
respecting the _other_ appointments (meaning the Ladies), that
provided I chose some who had a leaning towards the politics of the
Administration, I might take any I liked, and that he quite understood
that I should notify it to them. The Queen said this was her rule, and
that she wished to choose moderate people who should not have scruples
to resign in case another Administration should come in, as changing
was disagreeable to her. Here it ended, and so far well. He was
very anxious the Queen should understand _how_ anxious he was to do
everything which was agreeable to the Queen. The Queen wishes to know
if Lord Melbourne thinks she should name the Duchess of Buccleuch
Mistress of the Robes, on Wednesday, and if she shall ask Sir Robert
to sound the Duchess, or some one else, and then write to appoint her?
She thinks of proposing Lady de la Warr and Lady Abercorn by and by as
the two Ladies, but these she will sound herself through other people,
or Lady Canning, or Lady Rosslyn, in case these others should not take
it. She should say she meant to sound those, and no more. What the
Queen felt when she parted from her dear, kind friend, Lord Melbourne,
is better imagined than described; she was dreadfully affected for
some time after, but is calm now. It is very, very sad; and she cannot
quite believe it yet. The Prince felt it very, very much too, and
really the Queen cannot say how kind and affectionate he is to her,
and how anxious to do everything to lighten this heavy trial; he was
quite affected at this sad parting. We do, and shall, miss you so
dreadfully; Lord Melbourne will easily understand what a change it
is, after these four years when she had the happiness of having Lord
Melbourne always about her. But it will not be so long till we meet
again. Happier and brighter times will come again. We anxiously hope
Lord Melbourne is well, and got up well and safe. The Queen trusts he
will take care of his valuable health, now more than ever.

    [Footnote 76: Thomas, Earl de Grey (1781-1859); he was the
    elder brother of Lord Ripon, who had been previously known
    as Mr Robinson and Viscount Goderich, and whose son, besides
    inheriting his father's and uncle's honours, was created
    Marquis of Ripon.]

    [Footnote 77: Afterwards third Earl of St Germans.]

    [Footnote 78: Lady Byron had been Miss Elizabeth
    Chandos-Pole.]




_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _31st August 1841._

I was sent up to Town to-day to see Lord Melbourne and Sir Robert
Peel. I found Lord Melbourne as usual up in his bedroom. He had
received the account of Her Majesty's first interview with Peel, which
he thought very satisfactory. Sir Robert very much regretted that he
should have been the instrument of obliging Her Majesty to change her
Government. The Queen had said to Sir Robert that though she did not
conceive the Minister could demand any of the Household appointments,
still it was Her Majesty's intention to give up to him the great
offices of State, and all other places in the Household filled by
people in Parliament. He was to send his proposed list for offices the
next day and be at Windsor the morning after that. Lord Melbourne
had written to the Queen the night before, stating his opinion of the
Prince--that he had great discretion, temper, and judgment, and that
he considered him to be well worthy of Her Majesty's confidence, and
that now was the time for Her Majesty to feel comfort and assistance
from giving him her fullest confidence. He had just received the
Queen's answer to this, saying what "pleasure it had given the Queen
to receive his letter with this expression of his opinion of her
beloved husband, and that what he said could not fail to increase
the confidence which she already felt in him. He was indeed a great
comfort to her in this trying moment; at times she was very low indeed
though she strove to bear up. It would always be a satisfaction to
her to feel secure of Lord Melbourne's faithful and affectionate
friendship to her and the Prince. She hoped after a time to see him
here again, and it would always be a pleasure to her to hear from him
frequently."

From South Steet I went to Sir Robert Peel's. I told him I came to
speak to him about Lord Exeter, whom the Prince proposed to make
the head of his Household, should it not interfere with any of Sir
Robert's arrangements for the Queen. Sir Robert said he was so good a
man and one that he felt sure the Prince would like, and he therefore
thought he had better propose the situation to him at once.




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE'S OFFICIAL FAREWELL]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _31st August 1841._

Lord Melbourne had the pleasure of receiving last night both your
Majesty's letters, the one dated four o'clock, and written immediately
after your Majesty's interview with Sir R. Peel, the other dated
half-past nine. Lord Melbourne thanks your Majesty much for them both,
and for the expressions of kindness contained in them. Lord Melbourne
will ever consider the time during which your Majesty is good enough
to think that he has been of service to your Majesty the proudest as
well as the happiest part of his life.

Lord Melbourne has read with great care your Majesty's very clear and
full account of what passed. It appears to Lord Melbourne that nothing
could be better. Sir Robert Peel seems to have been anxious to act
with the utmost respect and consideration for your Majesty, and your
Majesty most properly and wisely met him half-way. In the spirit
in which the negotiation has been commenced I see the prospect of a
termination of it, which will be not so unsatisfactory to your
Majesty as your Majesty anticipated, and not, Lord Melbourne trusts,
disadvantageous to the country....

Lord Melbourne concludes with the most anxious wishes for your
Majesty's happiness and with expressing a great admiration of the
firmness, prudence, and good sense with which your Majesty has
conducted yourself.

Lord Melbourne begs to be remembered to His Royal Highness most
respectfully, most affectionately.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

_31st August 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has just
received your Majesty's letter. Lord Melbourne rejoices much to learn
that your Majesty feels more composed and that you are well. Recollect
how precious is your Majesty's health, and how much health depends
upon tranquillity of mind....

Lord Melbourne will either write to Sir Francis Chantrey[79] to-morrow
morning, or call upon him and settle without further delay about the
Bust. There is no end of subscriptions to Monuments, but perhaps your
Majesty will do well to subscribe to Sir David Wilkie's.[80]

Your Majesty is very good about the blue Ribband, but Lord Melbourne
is certain that upon the whole, it is better for his own position and
character that he should not have it.

    [Footnote 79: Sir Francis Chantrey, the sculptor, born in
    1781, died on 25th November 1841.]

    [Footnote 80: Sir David Wilkie, Painter-in-Ordinary to the
    Queen, had died on 1st June, aged fifty-six.]




[Pageheading: PEEL'S RECEPTION]


_The Earl of Clarendon[81] to Viscount Melbourne.[82]_

GROSVENOR CRESCENT, _31st August 1841._

MY DEAR MELBOURNE,--You may like to know that Peel was perfectly
satisfied with his reception yesterday, and does full justice to the
Queen's declaration of her regret at parting with her Ministers, which
he said it was quite natural she should feel, and quite right she
should express. This I know from undoubted authority, and from a
person who came to enquire of me whether I could tell what impression
Peel had produced upon the Queen, which of course I could not.

He assured the Queen that he had had no communication with his
friends, and was not prepared to submit an Administration for her
approval, but he is to see her again to-morrow morning.

The only appointment yet settled is De Grey to Ireland; he was very
unwilling, but Peel insisted. Yours sincerely,

CLARENDON.

    [Footnote 81: The retiring Lord Privy Seal.]

    [Footnote 82: Letter forwarded by Lord Melbourne to the
    Queen.]




[Pageheading: FAREWELL AUDIENCES]


_Viscount Palmerston to Queen Victoria._

CARLTON TERRACE, _31st August 1841._

... Viscount Palmerston begs to be allowed to tender to your Majesty
the grateful thanks of himself and of Viscountess Palmerston for your
Majesty's gracious expressions towards them. Viscount Palmerston sees
with deep regret the termination of those duties in your Majesty's
service, in the course of which he has had the honour of experiencing
from your Majesty so much condescending personal kindness, and
such flattering official confidence; and it affords him the highest
gratification to have obtained your Majesty's approbation.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _2nd September 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
your Majesty's letter yesterday evening, and was very glad to learn
from it that your Majesty was not ill satisfied with Sir Robert Peel,
and that the arrangements were going on smoothly, which it is highly
desirable that they should. Your Majesty should desire Sir Robert
Peel to give notice to all those who have insignia of office, such
as Seals, Wands, to give up, to attend at Claremont on Friday; but of
course he will do this of himself. Your Majesty will have much to go
through upon that day and much that is painful. Your Majesty should
spare yourself and be spared as much as possible. It will not be
necessary for Lord Melbourne to go down. He may be considered as
having resigned at the Audience which he had of your Majesty at
Windsor, and Lord Melbourne has ventured to tell Lord Lansdowne that
he thinks he need not do so either, and that your Majesty will excuse
his attendance. Lord Melbourne need say nothing about the Secretaries
of State, with all of whom your Majesty is so well acquainted; but
perhaps your Majesty will not omit to thank Mr Baring[83] cordially
for his services. He is a thoroughly honest man and an able public
servant. If your Majesty could say to the Lord Chancellor,[84] "that
you part with him with much sorrow; that you are sensible that much of
the strength of the late Administration was derived from the manner
in which he discharged the duties of his office, and that you consider
his retirement a great and serious loss to the country," it would
certainly be no more than he deserves.

It is thought by some who know him here that the Duke of Rutland will
be so extremely pleased with the offer being made, and that by your
Majesty yourself, that he will accept it; but he is a year older than
Lord Melbourne, and therefore hardly fit for any very active duty....

The appointment of Colonel Arbuthnot will of course be very agreeable
to the Duke of Wellington. The Arbuthnots are quiet, demure people
before others; but they are not without depth of purpose, and they are
very bitter at bottom.

Your Majesty will not forget the two Knights for Mr de la Beche[85]
and Major Monro.

Lord Melbourne begins to hope that this affair will be got through
more satisfactorily and with less annoyance than your Majesty
anticipated. As long as your Majesty is desirous of receiving his
communications, he will be always most careful to give your Majesty
his impartial opinion and the best advice which he has to offer. His
most fervent prayer will always be for your Majesty's welfare and
happiness.

    [Footnote 83: The retiring Chancellor of the Exchequer.]

    [Footnote 84: Lord Cottenham.]

    [Footnote 85: Sir Henry T. de la Beche, an eminent geologist.]




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE'S LAST OFFICIAL LETTER]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _2nd September 1841._

....Lord Melbourne hopes and trusts that when to-morrow is over your
Majesty will recover from that depression of spirits under which your
Majesty now labours. Lord Melbourne never doubted that it would be
so, but is glad to learn from your Majesty the support and consolation
which your Majesty finds in the advice and affection of the Prince.

This is the last letter which Lord Melbourne will send in a box. He
will to-morrow morning return his keys to the Foreign Office, and
after that your Majesty will be good enough to send the letters, with
which you may honour Lord Melbourne, through Mr Anson.

Lord Melbourne most anxiously wishes your Majesty every blessing.




[Pageheading: COUNCIL AT CLAREMONT]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _3rd September 1841._

Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes that your Majesty is well after this
trying day.[86] Lord Melbourne has thought and felt for your Majesty
all this morning. But now that the matter is settled it will be
necessary that your Majesty should take a calm and composed view of
the whole situation, which Lord Melbourne trusts that your Majesty
will find by no means unsatisfactory.

And first with respect to public affairs. In the concerns of a
great nation like this there will always be some difficulties and
entanglements, but upon the whole the present state is good and the
prospect is good for the future. There is no reason to expect that
Sir Robert Peel will either be desirous or be able to take a very
different course from that which has been taken by your Majesty's late
servants, and some difficulties will certainly be removed, and some
obstacles smoothed, by the change which has lately taken place.

With respect to the effect which will be produced upon the comfort of
your Majesty's private life, it would be idle in Lord Melbourne,
after what your Majesty has said, to doubt of the manner in which your
Majesty will feel the change, which must take place in your Majesty,
to long accustomed habits and relations. But your Majesty may rest
assured of Lord Melbourne's devoted and disinterested attachment
to your Majesty, and that he will devote himself to giving to your
Majesty such information and advice as may be serviceable to your
Majesty with the sole view of promoting your Majesty's public
interests and private happiness.

Lord Melbourne hopes, and indeed ventures to expect, that your
Majesty, upon reflection and consideration of the real state of
circumstances, will recover your spirits, and Lord Melbourne has
himself great satisfaction in thinking upon the consideration of
the advice which he has given, that it has not tended to impair your
Majesty's influence and authority, but, on the contrary, to secure to
your Majesty the affection, attachment, approbation, and support of
all parties.

In the course of this correspondence Lord Melbourne has thought it his
duty to your Majesty to express himself with great freedom upon
the characters of many individuals, whose names have come under
consideration, but Lord Melbourne thinks it right to say that he may
have spoken upon insufficient grounds, that he may have been mistaken,
and that the persons in question may turn out to be far better than he
has been induced to represent them.

    [Footnote 86: A Council had been held at Claremont for the
    outgoing Ministers to give up their Seals of Office, which
    were bestowed upon Sir Robert Peel and the incoming Cabinet.]




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE ON THE NEW MINISTRY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _4th September 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He was most
happy to hear yesterday the best account of everything that had taken
place at Claremont. Everybody praised, in the highest manner, the
dignity, propriety, and kindness of your Majesty's deportment, and if
it can be done without anything of deceit or dissimulation, it is well
to take advantage of the powers and qualities which have been given,
and which are so well calculated to gain a fair and powerful influence
over the minds and feelings of others. Your Majesty may depend upon
it, that the impression made upon the minds of all who were present
yesterday, is most favourable. Of course, with persons in new and
rather awkward situations, some of whom had never been in high office
before, all of whom had not been so now for some years, there was a
good deal of embarrassment and mistakes. Forms which are only gone
through at long intervals of time, and not every day, are necessarily
forgotten, and when they are required nobody knows them. But Lord
Melbourne cannot really think that they looked cross; most probably
they did look shy and embarrassed. Strange faces are apt to give the
idea of ill humour....

Lord Melbourne anxiously hopes that your Majesty is well and happy
to-day.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _5th September 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Your Majesty
may depend upon it, that if Lord Melbourne hears anything respecting
your Majesty, which it appears to him to be important or advantageous,
that your Majesty should know, Lord Melbourne will not fail to convey
it to your Majesty.

Lord Melbourne encloses the exact names of the two gentlemen to whom
Knighthood has been promised by your Majesty....

Your Majesty is very good, very good indeed, to think of doing what
your Majesty mentions for Fanny; but Lord Melbourne fears that it
would hardly suit with their present situation, or with the comfort of
their domestic life. But Lord Melbourne mentioned the matter yesterday
to his sister, and he encloses the letter which she has written to him
this morning, after reflecting upon the subject. By that letter your
Majesty will perceive that Jocelyn is not so much in debt, as Lord
Melbourne's letter had led your Majesty to suppose....

Lord B---- is a very old friend of Lord Melbourne's. They were at Eton
together, and intimate there. He is a gentlemanly man and a good man,
but not very agreeable. Few of the P----s are, and very bitter in
politics; but still Lord Melbourne is glad, for old acquaintance'
sake, that your Majesty has taken him. Lord Melbourne must again
repeat that when he writes with so much freedom about individual
characters, it is only to put your Majesty in possession of what he
knows respecting them, and not with a view of inducing your Majesty to
object to their being appointed....

Might not Fanny have the Bedchamber Woman's place? It would be a help
to her, and would not take her away from home. This only strikes Lord
Melbourne as he is writing.




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE ON PEEL]


_6th September 1841._

Lord Melbourne wrote the above yesterday, but had no opportunity of
sending it, as there was no post. Lord Melbourne has since seen Lady
Palmerston, and finds that his last suggestion about Fanny will not
do.

Lord Melbourne encloses Lady Palmerston's two notes upon the subject,
which will explain to your Majesty what she wishes. But if Jocelyn is
himself to get a place, this will be a better arrangement, and puts an
end to all the others.

What Lady Palmerston says about Sir R. Peel is very unjust. There
is no shabbiness whatever in his not coming to a decision upon the
factory question.[87]

    [Footnote 87: Lady Palmerston (no doubt in sympathy with Lord
    Ashley) expected some factory legislation to be announced.]




_Queen Victoria to the Countess of Gainsborough._[88]

CLAREMONT, _6th September 1841._

MY DEAREST LADY GAINSBOROUGH,--I had the pleasure of receiving your
two kind letters of the 24th and 25th ult. yesterday, and thank you
much for them. I am so happy that you are _really_ better....

I hoped that you would be pleased at what you thank me for; you see
I _did not_ forget what you told me once at Windsor when we were
out driving, and I assure you that Lord Melbourne was very anxious
to do it. Last week was a most painful, trying one to me, and this
separation from my truly excellent and kind friend Lord Melbourne,
_most_ distressing. You will understand _what_ a change it must be to
me. I am, however, so happy in my home, and have such a perfect angel
in the Prince, who has been such a comfort to me, that one must be
thankful and grateful for these blessings, and take these hard trials
as lessons sent from above, for our best.

Our little girl makes great progress, and suffers comparatively but
very little from her teething. We came here to be _quiet_ for a few
days, as this place is so very private.

The Baroness will write to Lord Gainsborough to say that I wish much
you would take Lady Lyttelton's waiting, which begins on 23rd of
November.

The Prince begs to be kindly named to you, and I to Fanny and your
brother, and pray believe me always, dearest Lady Gainsborough, ever
yours most affectionately,

VICTORIA R.

Pray thank Fanny for her kind letter.

    [Footnote 88: Formerly, as Lady Barham, a Lady of the
    Bedchamber. Lord Barham had been created Earl of Gainsborough
    in the course of the year (1841).]




[Pageheading: LORD CHAMBERLAIN'S DEPARTMENT]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

_7th September 1841._

The Queen wishes that Sir Robert Peel would mention to Lord De la
Warr[89] that he should be very particular in always naming to the
Queen any appointment he wishes to make in his department, and always
to take her pleasure upon an appointment before he settles on them;
this is a point upon which the Queen has always laid great stress.
This applies in great measure to the appointment of Physicians and
Chaplains, which used to be very badly managed formerly, and who were
appointed in a very careless manner; but since the Queen's accession
the Physicians and Chaplains have been appointed only for merit and
abilities, by the Queen herself, which the Queen is certain Sir Robert
Peel will at once see is a far better way, and one which must be of
use in every way. Sir Robert Peel may also tell Lord De la Warr that
it is unnecessary for him to appear in uniform, as the Queen
always dispenses with this in the country. This applies also to the
Ministers, who the Queen does not expect or wish should appear in
uniform at Councils which are held in the country. The Queen concludes
that it will be necessary to hold a Council some time next week to
swear in some of the new Officers who are not Privy Councillors; but
Sir Robert Peel will be able to tell the Queen when he thinks this
will be necessary.

    [Footnote 89: See _ante_, p 156.(Ch. VIII, 7th May, 1839)]




[Pageheading: DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

_8th September 1841._

There is a subject which the Queen wishes to mention to Sir Robert
Peel, as she is at present so little acquainted with Lord Aberdeen;
the Queen is very desirous that, if it were possible, Sir Hamilton
Seymour should not be removed from Brussels. The Queen believes that
his political views are not violent either way, and she knows that he
is peculiarly agreeable to her Uncle, which has, therefore, prompted
her to write this to Sir Robert Peel. The Queen seizes the same
opportunity to say that she is also very anxious that a moderate
and conciliatory person should be sent to Lisbon, as it is of great
importance there.




[Pageheading: THE FRENCH AMBASSADOR]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _8th September 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I begin my letter to-day, for fear I should have no
time to write to-morrow. Your kind letter gave me great pleasure, and
I must own your silence on all that was going on distressed me very
much! It has been indeed a sad time for me, and I am still bewildered,
and can't believe that my excellent Lord Melbourne is no longer
my Minister, but he will be, as you say, and has _already_ proved
himself, _very_ useful and _valuable_ as my friend out of office.
He writes to me often, and I write to him, and he gives really the
fairest and most impartial advice possible. But after seeing him for
four years, with very few exceptions--_daily_--you may imagine that I
_must_ feel the change; and the longer the time gets since we parted,
the _more_ I feel it. _Eleven days_ was the _longest_ I ever was
without seeing him, and this time will be elapsed on Saturday, so you
may imagine what the change must be. I cannot say what a comfort and
support my beloved Angel is to me, and how well and how kindly
and properly he behaves. I cannot resist copying for you what Lord
Melbourne wrote to me about Albert, the evening after we parted; he
has already praised him greatly to me, before he took leave of me. It
is as follows:

"Lord Melbourne cannot satisfy himself without again stating to your
Majesty in writing what he had the honour of saying to your Majesty
respecting H.R.H. the Prince. Lord Melbourne has formed the highest
opinion of H.R.H.'s judgment, temper, and discretion, and he cannot
but feel a great consolation and security in the reflection that
he leaves your Majesty in a situation in which your Majesty has the
inestimable advantage of such advice and assistance. Lord Melbourne
feels certain that your Majesty cannot do better than have recourse to
it, whenever it is needed, and rely upon it with confidence."

This naturally gave me great pleasure, and made me very proud, as it
comes from a person who is no flatterer, and would not have said it if
he did not think so, or feel so. The new Cabinet you have by this time
seen in the papers.

The Household (of which I send you a list) is well constituted--_for
Tories_.

Lord Aberdeen has written to me to say Bourqueney has announced Ste
Aulaire[90] as Ambassador. This is very well, but let me beg you, for
decency's sake, to stop his coming immediately; if _even not meant_
to, it would have the effect of their sending an ambassador the moment
the Government changed, which would be too marked, and most _offensive
personally_ to _me_. Indeed Guizot behaved very badly about refusing
to sign the Slave Trade Treaty[91] which they had so long ago settled
to do; it is unwise and foolish to irritate the late Government who
may so easily come in again; for Palmerston will _not_ forgive nor
_forget_ offences, and then France would be worse off than before,
with England. I therefore _beg_ you to stop Ste Aulaire for a little
while, else _I_ shall feel it a great personal offence.

_9th._--I have had a letter from Lord Melbourne to-day, who is much
gratified by yours to him.... Now adieu! Believe me, always, your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 90: See _post_, p. 334. (Ch. X, 1st October, 1841)]

    [Footnote 91: A treaty on the subject was signed in London,
    on 20th December, between Great Britain, France, Austria,
    Prussia, and Russia.]




[Pageheading: QUEEN ADELAIDE]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

SUDBURY HALL, _8th September 1841._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--I have not ventured to disturb you with a letter
since we parted, knowing how fully your time was employed with
business of importance. I cannot any longer now refrain to enquire
after you, after all you have gone through lately, and I must
congratulate you with all my heart on having so well completed your
difficult task.

There is but one voice of praise, I hear, of your perfect composure
and beautiful conduct during the trying scenes of last week. It has
gratified me more than I can express, for I had fully expected it of
you, and it has made me very happy to find that it has been generally
remarked and has given so much satisfaction. Everybody feels deeply
for you, and the devotion and zeal in your service is redoubled by
the interest your trying position has evoked. May our Heavenly Father
support and guide you always as hitherto, is my constant prayer!

I hope that the selection of your Government is to your own
satisfaction, and though the change must have been trying to you, I
trust that you will have perfect confidence in the able men who form
your Council. Our beloved late King's anxious wishes to see Wellington
and Peel again at the head of the Administration is now fulfilled. His
blessing rests upon you.

Excuse my having touched upon this subject, but I could not keep
silent whilst the heart is so full of earnest good wishes for your and
the country's prosperity.

I hope that an article of the newspapers, of the indisposition of your
darling child, is not true, and that she is quite well. God bless and
protect her!...

I am much amused with reading your Life by Miss Strickland,[92] which,
though full of errors, is earnest on the whole, and very interesting
to _me_. However, I wish she would correct the gross errors which
otherwise will go down to posterity. She ought to have taken first
better information before she published her work....

With my affectionate love to dear Prince Albert, believe me ever, my
dearest Niece, your most devoted and affectionate Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 92: Miss Agnes Strickland (1808-1874), who also
    edited _Letters of Mary Queen of Scots_, etc.]




_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

CLAREMONT, _9th September 1841._

The Ministerial arrangements are now nearly completed. Writs for new
elections moved last night.

Wrote to Sir Robert, telling him the Queen ought to have heard from
him respecting the adjournment of the House of Commons, instead of
seeing it first in the public papers. Told him also of its being the
Queen's wish that a short report of the debates in each House should
always be sent to Her Majesty, from him in the Commons and from the
Duke of Wellington in the Lords.

The Queen had a letter to-day from the Queen Dowager, which was kindly
meant, but which made Her Majesty rather angry, complimenting Her
Majesty on the good grace with which she had changed her Government,
and saying that the late King's blessing rested upon her for calling
the Duke of Wellington and Peel to her Councils, etc....




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN CRITICISES APPOINTMENTS]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

_9th September 1841._

The Queen takes this opportunity of writing to Sir Robert Peel
_confidentially_ about another person: this is about Lord ----. The
Queen is strongly of opinion that Lord ---- should _not_ be employed
in any post of importance, as his being so would, in her opinion,
be detrimental to the interests of the country. The Queen wishes Sir
Robert to state this to Lord Aberdeen as her opinion. The Queen is
certain that Sir Robert will take care that it should not be known
generally that this is her opinion, for she is always most anxious to
avoid anything that might appear personal towards anybody. The Queen
cannot refrain from saying that she cannot quite approve of Sir
Charles Bagot's appointment,[93] as from what she has heard of his
qualities she does not think that they are of a character quite to
suit in the arduous and difficult position in which he will be placed.
At the same time the Queen does not mean to object to his appointment
(for she has already formally approved of it), but she feels it her
duty to state frankly and at all times her opinion, as she begs Sir
Robert also to do unreservedly to her. For the future, it appears to
the Queen that it would be best in all appointments of such importance
that before a direct communication was entered into with the
individual intended to be proposed, that the Queen should be informed
of it, so that she might talk to her Ministers fully about it; not
because it is likely that she would object to the appointment, but
merely that she might have time to be acquainted with the qualities
and abilities of the person. The Queen has stated this thus freely to
Sir Robert as she feels certain that he will understand and appreciate
the motives which prompt her to do so. The Queen would wish the
Council to be at two on Tuesday, and she begs Sir Robert would inform
her which of the Ministers besides him will attend.

    [Footnote 93: As Governor-General of Canada.]




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

_9th September 1841._

... Sir Robert Peel will have the honour of writing to your Majesty
to-morrow on the subjects adverted to in the note which he has just
received from your Majesty.

He begs for the present to assure your Majesty that he shall consider
every communication which your Majesty may be pleased to address
to him in reference to the personal merits or disqualifications of
individuals as of a most confidential character.




[Pageheading: PEEL APOLOGISES]


_Sir Robert Peel to Mr Anson._

WHITEHALL, _10th September 1841._

MY DEAR SIR,--I am sorry if I have failed to make any communication to
Her Majesty respecting public matters, which Her Majesty has been in
the habit of receiving, or which she would have wished to receive.

Having been occupied in the execution of the important trust committed
to me not less than sixteen or eighteen hours of the twenty-four for
several days past, it may be that I have made some omissions in this
respect, which under other circumstances I might have avoided. I did
not think Her Majesty would wish to be informed of the issue of writs,
necessarily following the appointments to certain offices, of all
which Her Majesty had approved. I certainly ought to have written
to Her Majesty previously to the adjournment of the House of Commons
until Thursday the _16th of September_. It was an inadvertent omission
on my part, amid the mass of business which I have had to transact,
and I have little doubt that if I had been in Parliament I should have
avoided it.

The circumstances of my having vacated my seat, and of having
thus been compelled to leave to others the duty of proposing the
adjournment of the House, was one cause of my inadvertence.

Both the Duke of Wellington and I fully intended to make a report to
Her Majesty after the close of the Parliamentary business of each day,
and will do so without fail on the reassembling of Parliament.

I am, my dear Sir, very faithfully yours,

ROBERT PEEL.




[Pageheading: DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _10th September 1841._

... Lord Melbourne has no doubt that Sir Robert Peel has the most
anxious wish to do everything that can be agreeable to your Majesty.

Your Majesty should not omit to speak fully and seriously to him upon
the disposal of great appointments. Their Diplomatic Corps, from which
Ambassadors and Governors are generally taken, is the weakest part of
their establishment. They have amongst them men of moderate abilities
and of doubtful integrity, who yet have held high offices and
have strong claims upon them. The public service may suffer most
essentially by the employment of such men. Lord Melbourne would say
to Peel that "affairs depend more upon the hands to which they are
entrusted than upon any other cause, and that you hope he will well
consider those whose appointment to high and important situations
he sanctions, and that he will not suffer claims of connection or of
support to overbalance a due regard for your Majesty's service and the
welfare of the country." Such an expression of your Majesty's opinion
may possibly be a support to Sir Robert Peel against pretensions which
he would be otherwise unable to resist; but this is entirely submitted
to your Majesty's judgment, seeing that your Majesty, from an exact
knowledge of all that is passing, must be able to form a much more
correct opinion of the propriety and discretion of any step than Lord
Melbourne can do....

Lord Melbourne has a letter from Lord John Russell, rather eager for
active opposition; but Lord Melbourne will write to your Majesty more
fully upon these subjects from Woburn.




[Pageheading: CANADA]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

WOBURN ABBEY, _12th September 1841._

Lord Melbourne has this morning received your Majesty's letter of
yesterday. Lord Melbourne entirely agrees with your Majesty about
appointments. He knows, as your Majesty does from experience,
that with all the claims which there are to satisfy, with all the
prejudices which are to be encountered, and with all the interests
which require to be reconciled, it is impossible to select the best
men, or even always those properly qualified. He is the last man who
would wish that a Minister who has the whole machine of the Government
before him should be necessarily thwarted or interfered with in the
selection of those whom he may be desirous to employ. Lord Melbourne
would therefore by no means advise your Majesty to throw difficulty in
the way of the diplomatic arrangements which may be proposed, unless
there should be in them anything manifestly and glaringly bad. The
nomination of Lord ---- would have been so, but otherwise it cannot
very greatly signify who is the Ambassador at Vienna, or even at
Petersburg or Paris. Stuart de Rothesay[94] and Strangford[95] are not
good men, either of them, but it will be difficult for Lord Aberdeen
to neglect their claims altogether. Heytesbury[96] is an able man, the
best they have. Sir Robert Gordon[97] is an honest man, slow but not
illiberal. It would be well if your Majesty showed Lord Aberdeen that
you know these men, and have an opinion upon the subject of them.

Canada is another matter. It is a most difficult and most hazardous
task. There has been recent rebellion in the country. A new
Constitution has lately been imposed upon it by Parliament. The two
Provinces have been united, and the united Province is bordered by a
most hostile and uncontrollable community, the United States of North
America. To govern such a country at such a moment requires a man of
great abilities, a man experienced and practical in the management
of popular assemblies.... It is possible that matters may go smoothly
there, and that if difficulties do arise Sir C. Bagot may prove more
equal to them than from his general knowledge of his character Lord
Melbourne would judge him to be....

Upon the subject of diplomatic appointments Lord Melbourne has
forgotten to make one general observation which he thinks of
importance. Upon a change of Government a very great and sudden change
of all or many of the Ministers at Foreign Courts is an evil and to be
avoided, inasmuch as it induces an idea of a general change of policy,
and disturbs everything that has been settled. George III. always set
his face against and discouraged such numerous removals as tending to
shake confidence abroad in the Government of England generally and to
give it a character of uncertainty and instability. It would be well
if your Majesty could make this remark to Lord Aberdeen.

    [Footnote 94: The new Ambassador to St Petersburg.]

    [Footnote 95: Percy, sixth Viscount Strangford (1780-1855),
    formerly Ambassador to Constantinople, whom Byron described as

      "Hibernian Strangford, with thine eyes of blue,
      And boasted locks of red or auburn hue."]

    [Footnote 96: See _post_, p. 329. (Ch. X, 19th September, 1841)]

    [Footnote 97: The new Ambassador to Vienna.]




[Pageheading: INDIA AND AFGHANISTAN]

[Pageheading: LORD ELLENBOROUGH'S REPORT]

[Pageheading: INDIAN FINANCES]


_Lord Ellenborough[98] to Queen Victoria._

Lord Ellenborough presents his most humble duty to your Majesty, and
humbly acquaints your Majesty that having, on the morning after the
Council held at Claremont on the third of this month, requested the
clerks of the India Board to put him in possession of the latest
information with respect to the Political, Military, and Financial
affairs of India, he ascertained that on the 4th of June instructions
had been addressed to the Governor-General of India in Council in the
following terms:--"We direct that unless circumstances now unknown to
us should induce you to adopt a different course, an adequate force
be advanced upon Herat, and that that city and its dependencies may be
occupied by our troops, and dispositions made for annexing them to the
kingdom of Cabul."[99]

The last letters from Calcutta, dated the 9th of July, did not
intimate any intention on the part of the Governor-General in
Council of directing any hostile movement against Herat, and the
Governor-General himself having always evinced much reluctance to
extend the operations of the army to that city, it seemed almost
probable that the execution of the orders of the 4th of June would
have been suspended until further communication could be had with the
Home Authorities.

Nevertheless, in a matter of so much moment it did not appear to be
prudent to leave anything to probability, and at Lord Ellenborough's
instance your Majesty's confidential servants came to the conclusion
that no time should be lost in addressing to the Governor-General in
Council a letter in the following terms--such letter being sent, as
your Majesty must be aware, not directly by the Commissioners for the
Affairs of India, but, as the Act of Parliament prescribes in affairs
requiring secrecy, by their direction through and in the name of the
Secret Committee of the Court of Directors:--


"From the Secret Committee of the Court of Directors of the East India
Company to the Governor-General of India in Council.

"Her Majesty having been pleased to form a new Administration, we
think it expedient that no step should be taken with respect to
Herat which would have the effect of compelling the prosecution of a
specific line of Policy in the countries beyond the Indus, until
the new Ministers shall have had time to take the subject into their
deliberate consideration, and to communicate to us their opinions
thereupon.

"We therefore direct that, unless you should have already taken
measures in pursuance of our Instructions of the 4th of June
1841--which commit the honour of your Government to the prosecution
of the line of Policy which we thereby ordered you to adopt, or which
could not be arrested without prejudice to the Public interests, or
danger to the troops employed--you will consider those Instructions to
be suspended.

"We shall not fail to communicate to you at an early period our fixed
decision upon this subject."


It was not possible to bring this subject before your Majesty's
confidential servants before the afternoon of Saturday the 4th. The
mail for India, which should have been despatched on the 1st, had been
detained till Monday the 6th by the direction of your Majesty's late
Ministers, in order to enable your Majesty's present servants to
transmit to India and China any orders which it might seem to them
to be expedient to issue forthwith. Further delay would have been
productive of much mercantile inconvenience, and in India probably of
much alarm. In this emergency your Majesty's Ministers thought
that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to approve of their
exercising at once the power of directing the immediate transmission
to India of these Instructions.

Your Majesty must have had frequently before you strong proofs of
the deep interest taken by Russia in the affairs of Herat, and your
Majesty cannot but be sensible of the difficulty of maintaining in
Europe that good understanding with Russia which has such an important
bearing upon the general peace, if serious differences should exist
between your Majesty and that Power with respect to the States of
Central Asia.

But even if the annexation of Herat to the kingdom of Cabul were
not to have the effect of endangering the continuance of the good
understanding between your Majesty and Russia, still your Majesty will
not have failed to observe that the further advance of your Majesty's
forces 360 miles into the interior of Central Asia for the purpose
of effecting that annexation, could not but render more difficult
of accomplishment the original intention of your Majesty, publicly
announced to the world, of withdrawing your Majesty's troops from
Afghanistan as soon as Shah Sooja should be firmly established upon
the throne he owes to your Majesty's aid.

These considerations alone would have led Lord Ellenborough to desire
that the execution of the orders given on the 4th of June should at
least be delayed until your Majesty's confidential servants had had
time to consider maturely the Policy which it might be their duty to
advise your Majesty to sanction with respect to the countries on the
right bank of the Indus; but financial considerations strengthened
this desire, and seemed to render it an imperative duty to endeavour
to obtain time for mature reflection before any step should be taken
which might seriously affect the tranquillity of Europe, and must
necessarily have disastrous effects upon the Administration of India.

It appeared that the political and military charges now incurred
beyond the Indus amounted to £1,250,000 a year--that the estimate of
the expense of the additions made to the Army in India, since April
1838, was £1,138,750 a year, and that the deficit of Indian Revenue
in 1839-40 having been £2,425,625, a further deficit of £1,987,000 was
expected in 1840-41.

Your Majesty must be too well informed of the many evils consequent
upon financial embarrassment, and entertains too deep a natural
affection for all your Majesty's subjects, not to desire that in
whatever advice your Majesty's confidential servants may tender to
your Majesty with respect to the Policy to be observed in Afghanistan,
they should have especial regard to the effect which the protracted
continuance of military operations in that country, still more any
extension of them to a new and distant field, would have upon the
Finances of India, and thereby upon the welfare of eighty millions of
people who there acknowledge your Majesty's rule.

    [Footnote 98: President of the Board of Control.]

    [Footnote 99: For the progress of affairs in Afghanistan,
    _see_ Introductory Notes for 1839-1842.
      (to Ch. VIII; Ch. IX; Ch. X; Ch. XI)]




_Queen Victoria to Lord Ellenborough._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _19th September 1841._

The Queen thanks Lord Ellenborough for this clear and interesting
Memorandum he has sent. It seems to the Queen that the course intended
to be pursued--namely to take time to consider the affairs of India
without making any precipitate change in the Policy hitherto pursued,
and without involving the country hastily in expenses, is far the best
and safest.




[Pageheading: DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _19th September 1841._

In the conversation that the Queen had with Lord Aberdeen last week,
she omitted mentioning two persons to him. The one is Lord Heytesbury;
the Queen believes him to be a very able man, and would it not
therefore be a good thing to employ him in some important mission? The
other person is Mr Aston, who is at Madrid; the Queen hopes it may be
possible to leave him there, for she thinks that he acted with great
discretion, prudence, and moderation since he has been there, and the
post is one of considerable importance. He was, the Queen believes,
long Secretary to the Legation at Paris.




_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _21st September 1841._

Lord Aberdeen presents his most humble duty to your Majesty....

Lord Aberdeen has seen the favourable opinion which your Majesty has
been graciously pleased to express of Lord Heytesbury, and he humbly
presumes to think that this honour is not unmerited. The situation
of Governor-General of India has recently been proposed by Sir Robert
Peel for Lord Heytesbury's acceptance, which has been declined by him,
and it is understood that Lord Heytesbury is not at present desirous
of public employment.[100]

Your Majesty's servants have not yet fully considered the propriety
of submitting to your Majesty any proposal of a change in the Spanish
Mission; but the opinion which your Majesty has been pleased to
signify respecting the conduct of Mr Aston at Madrid appears, in
the humble judgment of Lord Aberdeen, to be fully confirmed by the
correspondence in this Office.

Lord Aberdeen would, however, venture humbly to mention that the
person filling this Mission has usually been replaced on a change of
the Administration at home. Should this be the case in the present
instance, Lord Aberdeen begs to assure your Majesty that the greatest
care will be taken to select an individual for your Majesty's
approbation who may be qualified to carry into effect the wise, just,
and moderate policy which your Majesty has been graciously pleased to
recognise in the conduct of Mr Aston.

    [Footnote 100: He was made Governor and Captain of the Isle of
    Wight, and Governor of Carisbrooke Castle.]




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE AND PEEL]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

ROYAL LODGE, _21st September 1841._

Saw Baron Stockmar this morning at the Castle, and had a good deal of
conversation with him on various matters. He is very apprehensive that
evil will spring out of the correspondence now carried on between the
Queen and Lord Melbourne. He thinks it is productive of the greatest
possible danger, and especially to Lord Melbourne; he thought no
Government could stand such undermining influence. I might tell this
to Lord Melbourne, and say that if he was totally disconnected from
his Party, instead of being the acknowledged head, there would not
be the same objection. He said, Remind Lord Melbourne of the time
immediately after the Queen's accession, when he had promised the King
of the Belgians to write to him from time to time an account of all
that was going on in this country; and upon Lord Melbourne telling
him of this promise, he replied, This will not do. It cannot be kept a
secret that you keep up this correspondence, and jealousy and distrust
will be the fruit of a knowledge of it. "Leave it to me," he said, "to
arrange with the King; you cease to write, and I will put it straight
with the King."

The Baron seemed to expect Lord Melbourne to draw the inference from
this that a correspondence between Lord Melbourne and the Queen was
fraught with the same danger, and would, when known, be followed
by distrust and jealousy on the part of Sir Robert Peel. I said I
reconciled it to myself because I felt that it had been productive of
much good and no harm--and that, feeling that it was conducted on
such honourable terms, I should not, if it were necessary, scruple to
acquaint Sir Robert Peel of its existence. The Baron said, "Ask Lord
Melbourne whether he would object to it." He said Peel, when he heard
it, would not, on the first impression, at all approve of it; but
prudence and caution would be immediately summoned to his aid, and he
would see that it was his policy to play the generous part--and would
say he felt all was honourably intended, and he had no objection to
offer--"but," said the Baron, "look to the result. Distrust, being
implanted from the first, whenever the first misunderstanding arose,
or things took a wrong turn, all would, in Peel's mind, be immediately
attributed to this cause."




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _24th September 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I have already thanked you for your two kind
letters, but I did not wish to answer them but by a Messenger. I feel
thankful for your praise of my conduct; all is going on well, but it
would be needless to attempt to deny that I _feel_ the _change_, and
I own I am much happier when I need _not_ see the Ministers; luckily
they do not want to see me often. I feel much the King's kindness
about Ste Aulaire;[101] I shall see him here on Tuesday next.

I return you our excellent friend Melbourne's letter, which I had
already seen, as he sent it me to read, and then seal and send. I miss
him much, but I often hear from him, which is a great pleasure to me.
It is a great satisfaction to us to have Stockmar here; he is a great
resource, and is now in excellent spirits.

Mamma is, I suppose, with you now, and we may expect her here either
next Thursday or Friday. How much she will have to tell us! I am very
grateful for what you say of Claremont, which could so easily be
made perfect; and I must say we enjoy ourselves there always
_particulièrement_.... Albert begs me to make you his excuses for not
writing, but I can bear testimony that he really has not time to-day.
And now _addio!_ dearest Uncle, and pray believe me, always, your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 101: See _post_, p. 334. (Ch. X, 1st October, 1841)]




[Pageheading: FINE ARTS COMMISSION]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

_26th September 1841._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
be permitted to submit for your Majesty's consideration a suggestion
which has occurred to Sir Robert Peel, and which has reference to
the communication which he recently addressed to your Majesty on
the subject of the promotion of the Fine Arts in connection with the
building of the new Houses of Parliament.

Sir Robert Peel would humbly enquire from your Majesty whether (in
the event of your Majesty's being graciously pleased to approve of the
appointment of a Royal Commission for the further investigation and
consideration of a subject of such deep importance and interest to
the encouragement of art in this country) your Majesty would deem
it desirable that the Prince should be invited in the name of your
Majesty to place himself at the head of this Commission, and to give
to it the authority and influence of his high name, and the advantage
of his taste and knowledge.

Sir Robert Peel will not of course mention this subject to any
one, until he has had the honour of receiving from your Majesty an
intimation of your Majesty's opinions and wishes on this subject.




[Pageheading: DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _28th September 1841._

... The diplomatic appointments are as well as they could be made.
At least Lord Melbourne thinks so--at least as much in consequence
of those whom they exclude, as of those whom they admit. The Duke of
Beaufort will do better for Petersburg than for Vienna. He is hardly
equal to the place, which requires a clever man, it being more
difficult to get information there, and to find out what is going on,
than in any other country in Europe.... But Lord Melbourne does not
much regard this, and the Duke of Beaufort possesses one advantage,
which is of the greatest importance in that country. He is a soldier,
was the Duke of Wellington's Aide-de-Camp, and served during much of
the Peninsular War. He will therefore be able to accompany the Emperor
to reviews, and to talk with him about troops and man[oe]uvres. Sir
Robert Gordon and Sir S. Canning will do very well.[102]

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear that your Majesty was pleased and
impressed with Archdeacon Wilberforce's[103] sermon and his manner of
delivering it. Lord Melbourne has never seen nor heard him. His father
had as beautiful and touching a voice as ever was heard. It was very
fine in itself. He spoiled it a little by giving it a methodistical
and precatory intonation.

Hayter has been to Lord Melbourne to-day to press him to sit to him,
which he will do as soon as he has done with Chantrey. Chantrey says
that all Lord Melbourne's face is very easy except the mouth. The
mouth, he says, is always the most difficult feature, and he can
rarely satisfy himself with the delineation of any mouth, but Lord
Melbourne's is so flexible and changeable that it is almost impossible
to catch it.

    [Footnote 102: For Vienna and Constantinople.]

    [Footnote 103: Samuel, son of William Wilberforce, at this
    date Archdeacon of Surrey, and chaplain to Prince Albert;
    afterwards, in 1844, appointed Bishop of Oxford, and
    eventually translated to the See of Winchester.]




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE'S ADVICE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _1st October 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
your Majesty's letter yesterday evening, and cannot express to your
Majesty how much obliged he feels by your Majesty's taking the trouble
to give him so much information upon so many points. Ste Aulaire's
hair-powder seems to make a very deep and general impression.[104]
Everybody talks about it. "He appears to be very amiable and
agreeable," everybody says, but then adds, "I never saw a man wear so
much powder." A head so whitened with flour is quite a novelty and a
prodigy in these times. Lord Melbourne has not yet seen him, but means
to call upon him immediately. Lord Melbourne is upon the whole
glad that the Duke of Beaufort has declined St Petersburg. It is an
appointment that might have been acquiesced in, but would not have
been approved. Bulwer[105] will not be a bad choice to accompany Sir
Charles[106] to Canada. Your Majesty knows Bulwer well. He is clever,
keen, active; somewhat bitter and caustic, and rather suspicious. A
man of a more straightforward character would have done better, but
it would be easy to have found many who would have done worse. Lord
Melbourne is very glad that it has been offered to the Prince to be at
the head of this Commission, and that His Royal Highness has accepted
it. It is an easy, unexceptionable manner of seeing and becoming
acquainted with a great many people, and of observing the mode of
transacting business in this country. The Commission itself will be
a scene of very considerable difference of opinion. Lord Melbourne
is for decorating the interior of the Houses of Parliament, if it be
right to do so, but he is not for doing it, whether right or wrong,
for the purpose of spending the public money in the encouragement of
the Fine Arts. Whether it is to be painting or sculpture, or both; if
painting, what sort of painting, what are to be the subjects chosen,
and who are to be the artists employed? All these questions furnish
ample food for discussion, difference, and dispute. Chantrey says
fresco will never do; it stands ill in every climate, will never stand
long in this, even in the interior of a building, and in a public work
such as this is, durability is the first object to be aimed at. He
says that there is in the Vatican a compartment of which the middle
portion has been painted by Giulio Romano[107] in fresco, and at each
of the ends there is a figure painted by Raphael in oil. The fresco
painting has been so often repaired in consequence of decay, that not
a vestige of the original work remains; while the two figures painted
by Raphael in oil still stand out in all their original freshness, and
even improved from what they were when first executed....

Lord Melbourne dined and slept on Wednesday at Wimbledon.[108] He
met there Lord and Lady Cottenham, Lord[109] and Lady Langdale, Lord
Glenelg and his brother, Mr Wm. Grant, who was his private secretary,
and is an amusing man. Lord Melbourne is going there again to-morrow
to stay until Monday. The place is beautiful; it is not like
Claremont, but it is quite of the same character, and always puts Lord
Melbourne in mind of it. The Duchess has many merits, but amongst them
is the not small one of having one of the best cooks in England.


    [Footnote 104: Madame de Lieven wrote to Aberdeen, 12th
    September 1841: "Ne jugez pas cet Ambassadeur par son
    exterieur; il personnifie un peu les Marquis de Molière....
    Passez-lui ses cheveux poudrés, son air galant et papillon
    auprès des femmes. He cannot help it."]

    [Footnote 105: Sir Henry Bulwer, afterwards Lord Dalling.]

    [Footnote 106: Sir Charles Bagot.]

    [Footnote 107: He was a pupil of Raphael, celebrated for
    (among other works) his "Fall of the Titans."]

    [Footnote 108: The word is almost illegible. Wimbledon was at
    that time in the occupation of the Duke of Somerset.]

    [Footnote 109: Master of the Rolls.]




[Pageheading: PEERS AND AUDIENCES]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _2nd October 1841._

Sir James Graham with humble duty begs to lay before your Majesty two
letters, which he has received from the Earl of Radnor,[110] together
with the copy of the answer which Sir James Graham returned to the
first of the two letters.

If the presentation of Petitions were the sole subject of the
Audience, it might be needless to impose on your Majesty the
trouble incident to this mode of receiving them, since they might be
transmitted through the accustomed channel of one of the Secretaries
of State; but Sir James Graham infers from a conversation which,
since the receipt of the letters he has had with Lord Radnor, that
the Audience is asked in exercise of a right claimed by Peers of the
Realm.

The existence of this right is not recognised by Statute; but it
rests in ancient usage, and is noticed by Judge Blackstone in his
Commentaries on the Laws of England in the following terms:--

"It is usually looked upon to be the right of each particular Peer of
the Realm to demand an Audience of the King, and to lay before him,
with decency and respect, such matters as he shall judge of importance
to the public weal."

The general practice on the part of the Sovereign has been not to
refuse these Audiences when Peers have asked them....

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's dutiful Subject and
Servant,

J. R. G. GRAHAM.

    [Footnote 110: William, third Earl, formerly M.P. for
    Salisbury.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir James Graham._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _3rd October 1841._

The Queen has received Sir James Graham's communication with the
enclosures. She thinks that it would be extremely inconvenient if
Audiences were to be granted to Peers for the purpose of presenting
Petitions or Addresses. The Queen knows that it has always been
considered a sort of right of theirs to ask for and receive an
Audience of the King or Queen. But the Queen knows that upon several
occasions Lord Melbourne and Lord John Russell wrote to the Peers who
requested Audiences, stating that it would be very inconvenient for
the Queen, particularly in the country, and that they had better
either put off asking for it, till the Queen came to town, or send
what they had to say; communicate in writing--which was complied with.
If, therefore, Sir James Graham would state this to Lord Radnor, he
may probably give up pressing for an Audience. Should he, however,
urge his wish very strongly, the Queen will see him in the manner
proposed by Sir James. The Queen would wish to hear from Sir James
again before she gives a final answer.




[Pageheading: THE CHINESE CAMPAIGN]


_Lord Ellenborough to Queen Victoria._

INDIA BOARD, _2nd October 1841._

Lord Ellenborough, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, humbly
acquaints your Majesty that your Majesty's Ministers, taking into
consideration the smallness of the force with which the campaign in
China was commenced this year, and the advanced period of the season
at which the reinforcements would arrive (which reinforcements would
not so raise the strength of the Army as to afford any reasonable
expectation that its operations will produce during the present year
any decisive results), have deemed it expedient that instructions
would be at once issued to the Indian Government with a view to the
making of timely preparations for the campaign of 1842.[111]

Your Majesty's Ministers are of opinion that the War with China should
be conducted on an enlarged scale, and the Indian Government will
be directed to have all their disposable military and naval force
at Singapore in April, so that the operations may commence at the
earliest period which the season allows.

Lord Ellenborough cannot but entertain a sanguine expectation that
that force so commencing its operations, and directed upon a point
where it will intercept the principal internal communication of the
Chinese Empire, will finally compel the Chinese Government to accede
to terms of Peace honourable to your Majesty, and affording future
security to the trade of your Majesty's subjects.

    [Footnote 111: Ningpo was taken by Sir Hugh Gough on 13th
    October 1841, and no further operations took place till the
    spring of the following year. _See_ Introductory Note, _ante_,
    p. 254. (Intro Note to Ch. X)]




_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _3rd October 1841._

Sat by the Queen last night at dinner. Her Majesty alluded to Sir
Robert Peel's awkward manner, which she felt she could not get over.
I asked if Her Majesty had yet made any effort, which I was
good-humouredly assured Her Majesty "thought she really had done."

Sir Robert's ignorance of character was most striking and
unaccountable; feeling this, made it difficult for Her Majesty to
place reliance upon his judgment in recommendations.




[Pageheading: ENGLISH AND FOREIGN ARTISTS]


[Pageheading: SIR FRANCIS CHANTREY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _4th October 1811._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He had the
honour of receiving your Majesty's letter of the 2nd inst. yesterday,
at Wimbledon. If Lord Melbourne should hear of anything of what your
Majesty asks respecting the impression made upon Sir Robert and Lady
Peel, he will take care and inform your Majesty, but, of course,
they will speak very favourably, and if they feel otherwise will not
breathe it except in the most secret and confidential manner.

Lord Melbourne is very much rejoiced to hear that the Duchess of Kent
arrived safe and well and in good spirits.

Lord Melbourne sat to Sir F. Chantrey on Saturday last. He will, Lord
Melbourne believes, require only one more sitting, which he wishes to
be at the distance of a week from the last, in order that he may
take a fresh view of the bust, and not become reconciled to its
imperfections by continually looking at it. It may give the Prince
some idea of the national feeling which prevails here, when he is told
that Lord Melbourne upon asking Sir F. Chantrey what ought to be done
if foreign artists were employed to paint the Houses of Parliament,
received from him the following answer: "Why, their heads ought to be
broke and they driven out of the country, and, old as I am, I should
like to lend a hand for that purpose."




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _5th October 1841._

... Lord Melbourne, by telling your Majesty what Sir Francis Chantrey
said respecting foreign artists, and by requesting your Majesty to
repeat it to the Prince, by no means intended to imply that there was
any disposition on the part of His Royal Highness to recommend the
employment of foreigners. He only meant to convey the idea of the
strength of the prejudice which is felt by enlightened and able men
upon the subject. Lord Melbourne has been sitting this morning to
Hayter for the picture of the marriage, and he (Hayter) held an
entirely contrary language. His tone is: "If foreign artists are more
capable than English, let them be employed. All I require is that the
work should be done as well as it can be." The English are certainly
very jealous of foreigners, and so, Lord Melbourne apprehends, are
the rest of mankind, but not knowing himself any nation except the
English, he cannot venture to make positively that assertion. Lord
Melbourne has been reading the evidence given before the committee of
the House of Commons upon this subject. It is well worth attention,
particularly Mr Eastlake's,[112] which appears to Lord Melbourne to be
very enlightened, dispassionate, and just....

    [Footnote 112: Afterwards Sir Charles Eastlake, Keeper of the
    National Gallery, 1843-1847, President of the Royal Academy,
    1850-1865.]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE'S GRANT]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _6th October 1841._

Sat by Her Majesty last night at dinner.

The Queen had written to Lord Melbourne about coming to the Castle,
but in his answer he had made no allusion to it; she did not know
whether this was accidental or intentional, for he very often gave no
answer to questions which were put.

I told Her Majesty that I feared he had raised an obstacle to his
visit by making a strong speech against the Government just at the
time he was thinking of coming. That this attack had identified him as
the leader of his Party, at a moment when I had been most anxious
that he should abstain from taking an active part, and by withdrawing
himself from politics he would enable himself to become the more
useful friend to Her Majesty. The Queen had not seen the speech,
was sorry he had felt himself obliged to make it, but it would
be difficult for him to avoid it after having been so long Prime
Minister.

Her Majesty told me that previous to the exit of the late Government,
Lord John had earnestly cautioned Her Majesty not to propose any
new grant of money, as it would in the case of £70,000 for the new
stables, however unfairly, bring great unpopularity upon the Queen. I
said in regard to any increase to the Prince's annuity, I thought
it would be very imprudent in him to think of it, except under very
peculiar circumstances which might arise, but which could not yet be
foreseen. The Queen said that _nothing_ should induce Her Majesty to
accept such a favour from these Ministers. Peel probably now regretted
his opposition to the grant, but it was, and was intended to be, a
personal insult to herself, and it was followed up [by] opposition
to her private wishes in the precedency question, where the Duke of
Wellington took the lead against her wishes, as Peel had done in the
Commons against the Prince's grant. She never could forget it, and no
favour to her should come from such a quarter. I told Her Majesty I
could not rest the Prince's case on Her Majesty's objections if they
were the only ones which could be brought forward. If the case again
rose I feared Her Majesty would find many who before, from Party
views, voted according to Her Majesty's wishes, would now rank on the
opposite side.

Her Majesty asked Dr Hawtrey the evening before who was the cleverest
boy at Eton.

Dr Hawtrey made a profound bow to the Queen and said, "I trust your
Majesty will excuse my answering, for if I did I make 600 enemies at
once."




_Memorandum by Baron Stockmar._

_6th October 1841._

The Queen had asked Lord Melbourne whether he would soon visit her at
Windsor. He had not replied on that point, but had written to Prince
Albert in order to learn first the Prince's opinion on the feasibility
of the matter.

The Prince sent for me and consulted with me. I was of opinion that
the Prince had better refrain from giving an answer, and that I should
give my opinion in the written form of a Memorandum, with which Anson
should betake himself to town. He was to read it aloud to Melbourne,
and orally to add what amplifications might be necessary.

And so it was done.


[Pageheading: RELATIONS WITH PEEL]


My Memorandum was as follows:--

    Sir Robert Peel has yet to make his position opposite[113] the
    Queen, which for him to obtain is important and desirable for
    obvious reasons. I have good cause to doubt that Sir Robert
    is sure within himself of the good-will and confidence of the
    Queen. As long as the secret communication exists between Her
    Majesty and Lord Melbourne, this ground, upon which alone Sir
    Robert could obtain the position necessary to him as Premier,
    must remain cut away from under his feet. I hold, therefore,
    this secret interchange an _essential injustice_ to Sir
    Robert's present situation. I think it equally wrong to call
    upon the Prince to give an opinion on the subject, as he has
    not the means to cause his opinion to be either regarded or
    complied with. In this particular matter nobody has paramount
    power to do right or wrong but the Queen, and more especially
    Lord Melbourne himself. To any danger which may come out of
    this to Her Majesty's character, the caution and objection
    must come from him, and from him alone; and if I was standing
    in his shoes I would show the Queen, of my own accord,
    and upon constitutional grounds _too_, that a continued
    correspondence of that sort must be fraught with imminent
    danger to the Queen, especially to Lord Melbourne, and to the
    State.

    [Footnote 113: _I.e._ with.]

I then gave Anson the further arguments with which he was to accompany
the reading out of this Memo.


[Pageheading: DISCRETION URGED ON MELBOURNE]

[Pageheading: MELBOURNE'S INFLUENCE]

On the next day Anson went to Melbourne and told him that his note to
him had raised a great consultation, that the Prince felt much averse
to giving any opinion in a case upon which he could exercise no
control, and in which, if it was known that he had given his sanction,
he would be held responsible for any mischief which might arise. He
had consulted Baron Stockmar, who had written the enclosed opinion,
which the Prince had desired Anson to read to Lord Melbourne.
Melbourne read it attentively twice through, with an occasional change
of countenance and compression of lips. He said on concluding
it: "This is a most decided opinion indeed, quite an '_apple[114]
opinion_.'" Anson told him that the Prince felt that if the Queen's
confidence in Peel was in a way to be established, it would be
extremely shaken by his (Lord Melbourne's) visit at such a moment. He
felt that it would be better that Lord Melbourne's appearance should
be in London, where he would meet the Queen only on the terms of
general society, but at the same time he (the Prince) was extremely
reluctant to give an opinion upon a case which Lord Melbourne's own
sense of right ought to decide. Anson added how he feared his speech
of yesterday in the House of Lords[115] had added another impediment
to his coming at this moment, as it had identified him with and
established as the head of the Opposition party, which he (Anson) had
hoped Melbourne would have been able to avoid. Melbourne, who was then
sitting on the sofa, rushed up upon this, and went up and down the
room in a violent frenzy, exclaiming--"God eternally d--n it!"
etc., etc. "Flesh and blood cannot stand this. I only spoke upon
the defensive, which Ripon's speech at the beginning of the session
rendered quite necessary. I cannot be expected to give up my position
in the country, neither do I think that it is to the Queen's interest
that I should."

Anson continued that the Baron thought that no Ministry could stand
the force of such an undercurrent influence, that all the good that
was to be derived from pacifying the Queen's mind at the change had
been gained, and that the danger which we were liable to, and which
threatened him in particular, could only be averted by his own
straightforward decision with the Queen. Anson asked him if _he_ saw
any danger likely to arise from this correspondence. After a long
pause he said, "_I certainly cannot think it right_," though he
felt sure that some medium of communication of this sort was no new
precedent. He took care never to say anything which could bring his
opinion in opposition _to Sir Robert's, and he should distinctly
advise the Queen to adhere to her Ministers in everything,[116]
unless he saw the time had arrived at which it might be
resisted_.[117] The principal evil, replied Anson, to be dreaded from
the continuance of Lord Melbourne's influence was, according to the
Baron's opinion, that so long as the Queen felt she could resort to
Lord Melbourne for his advice, she never would be disposed (from not
feeling the necessity) to place any real confidence in the advice she
received from Peel.

    [Footnote 114: No doubt Lord Melbourne said an "apple-pie"
    opinion.]

    [Footnote 115: At the opening of the Session Lord Ripon had
    reprobated the late Government for resorting to temporary
    expedients, and Lord Melbourne, on the second reading of the
    Exchequer-bills Funding Bill, caustically but good-humouredly
    replied to the attack.]

    [Footnote 116: _Note by Baron Stockmar._--If he wishes to
    carry this out consistently and quite honestly, what then is
    the value of his advice, if it be only the copy of that of Sir
    R. Peel?]

    [Footnote 117: _Note by Baron Stockmar._--This means, in my
    way of reading it: "The Queen, by her correspondence with
    me, puts Peel into my hands, and there I mean to let him stay
    unhurt, until time and extraneous circumstances--but more
    especially the advantage that will accrue to me by my secret
    correspondence with the Queen--shall enable me to plunge, in
    all security, the dagger into his back."]




_The Earl of Liverpool to Baron Stockmar._[118]

FIFE HOUSE, _7th October 1841._

MY DEAR BARON,--Peel sent for me this morning to speak to me about
the contents of his letter to me. After some general conversation on
matters respecting the Royal Household, he said that he had had
much satisfaction in his intercourse lately with Her Majesty, and
specifically yesterday, and he asked me whether I had seen Her Majesty
or the Prince yesterday, and whether they were satisfied with him. I
told him that except in public I had not seen Her Majesty, and except
for a moment in your room I had not seen the Prince; but that as he
spoke to me on this matter, I must take the opportunity of saying a
word to him about _you_, from whom I had learnt yesterday that both
the Queen and Prince are extremely well pleased with him. That I
had known you very long, but that our great intimacy began when King
Leopold sent you over just previous to the Queen's accession; that we
had acted together on that occasion, and that our mutual esteem and
intimacy had increased; that your position was a very peculiar one,
and that you might be truly said to be a species of second parent to
the Queen and the Prince; that your only object was their welfare, and
your only ambition to be of service to them; that in this sense you
had communicated with Melbourne, and that I wished that in this sense
you should communicate with him (Peel). He said that he saw the matter
exactly as I did, that he wished to communicate with you, and felt the
greatest anxiety to do everything to meet the wishes of the Queen and
Prince in all matters within his power, and as far as consistent
with his known and avowed political principles; that in all matters
respecting the Household and their private feelings that the smallest
hint sufficed to guide him, as he would not give way to any party
feeling or job which should in any way militate against Her Majesty
or His Royal Highness's comfort; that he wished particularly that it
should be known that he never had a thought of riding _roughshod_ over
Her Majesty's wishes; that if you would come to him at any time, and
be candid and explicit with him, you might depend upon his frankness
and discretion; that above all, if you had said anything to him, and
expressed a wish that it might not be communicated even to the Duke of
Wellington, (that was his expression), that he wished me to assure you
that your wishes should be strictly attended to. Pray give me a line
to say that you do not disapprove of what I have done. We had a great
deal more conversation, but with this I will not now load my letter,
being ever sincerely yours,

LIVERPOOL.

Direct your answer to this house.

    [Footnote 118: This letter was submitted to the Queen.]




[Pageheading: AUDIENCES OF PEERS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _8th October 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has this
morning received your Majesty's letter of yesterday. There can be no
doubt that your Majesty is right about the Audiences which have been
requested....

Sir Robert Peel is probably right in supposing that the claim of a
Peer to an Audience of the Sovereign originated in early times, and
before the present course of government by responsible advisers was
fully and decidedly established, which it hardly can be said to have
been until after the accession of the House of Hanover, but the custom
of asking for such Audiences, and of their being in general granted,
was well known, and has for the most part been observed and adhered
to. Lord Melbourne remembers that during the part of the French War,
when considerable alarm began to prevail respecting its duration, and
the serious aspect which it was assuming, George III. gave Audiences
to the Duke of Norfolk and others which he certainly would not have
been inclined to do if he had not thought himself bound by his duty
and by Constitutional precedent. At the time of the passing of the
Roman Catholic Relief Act, George IV. received very many Peers, much
no doubt against his will, who came to remonstrate with him upon the
course which his Ministers were pursuing. William IV. did the same at
the time of the Reform Bill, and certainly spoke upon the subject in
a manner which Lord Melbourne always thought indiscreet and imprudent.
Upon the whole, the practice has been so much acted upon and
established, that Lord Melbourne will certainly not think it wise to
make any alteration now, especially as it has in itself beneficial
effects, especially as in a time of strong political feeling it is a
satisfaction to the people to think that their wishes and opinions are
laid before the Sovereign fairly and impartially. It is not likely to
be a very heavy burthen, inasmuch as such Audiences are only asked at
particular moments, and they are not in themselves very burthensome
nor difficult to deal with. It is only for the Sovereign to say that
he is convinced of the good motives which have actuated the step, and
that consideration will be given to the matter and arguments which
have been stated.

Lord Melbourne has one vague recollection of a correspondence upon
this subject between Lord Holland and some King, but does not remember
the circumstances with any accuracy.

Duncannon[119] persuaded Brougham to give up asking an Audience upon
condition of Lord Melbourne's promising to place his letters in your
Majesty's hands, which he did.[120] Lord Charlemont[121] also was
prevented in some manner or another, which Lord Melbourne forgets.

Upon the whole, Lord Melbourne thinks that it is best to concede this
privilege of the Peerage, whether it actually exists or not, but to
restrain it within due and reasonable bounds, which in ordinary times
it is not difficult to do. Extraordinary times must be dealt with as
they can be....

Lady A---- is, as your Majesty says, good-natured. She talks three or
four times as much as she ought, and like many such women often says
exactly the things she ought not to say. Lady B---- has ten times the
sense of her mother, and a little residue of her folly.

    [Footnote 119: Ex-First Commissioner of Land Revenue.]

    [Footnote 120: See _ante_, pp. 293 and 335-6.
      (Ch. X, 'Lord Brougham'; 'Peers and Audiences')]

    [Footnote 121: Francis William, fifth Viscount Charlemont
    (1775-1863), created a Peer of the United Kingdom in 1837.]




[Pageheading: GOVERNOR-GENERALSHIP OF INDIA]

[Pageheading: LORD ELLENBOROUGH]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

_9th October 1841._

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave
to inform your Majesty that in consequence of the opinion which your
Majesty was graciously pleased to express when Sir Robert Peel last
had the honour of waiting upon your Majesty, with respect to the
superior qualifications of Lord Ellenborough for the important
trust of Governor-General of India, Sir Robert Peel saw his Lordship
yesterday, and enquired whether he would permit Sir Robert Peel to
propose his appointment to your Majesty.

Lord Ellenborough was very much gratified by the proposal, admitted at
once that it was very difficult to find an unexceptionable candidate
for an office of such pre-eminent importance, but made some difficulty
on two points.

First--Considerations of health, which though disregarded personally,
might, he feared, interfere with the execution of such unremitting and
laborious duties as would devolve upon the Governor-General of India.

Secondly--The consideration that on his acceptance of the office he
would be required by law to give up during his tenure of it no less
than £7,500 per annum, the amount of compensation now paid to him in
consequence of the abolition of a very valuable office[122] which he
held in the Courts of Law.

During Lord Ellenborough's conversation with Sir Robert Peel, and
while the mind of Lord Ellenborough was very much in doubt as to the
policy of his acceptance of the office, the box which contained your
Majesty's note of yesterday was brought to Sir Robert Peel.

Sir Robert Peel humbly acquaints your Majesty that he ventured to read
to Lord Ellenborough on the instant the concluding paragraph of your
Majesty's note, namely--

"The more the Queen thinks of it, the more she thinks that Lord
Ellenborough would be far the most fit person to send to India."

Sir Robert Peel is perfectly convinced that this opinion of your
Majesty, so graciously expressed, removed every doubt and difficulty
from Lord Ellenborough's mind, and decided him to forgo every personal
consideration rather than appear unmindful of such a favourable
impression of his qualifications for public service on the part of his
Sovereign.

Sir Robert Peel humbly hopes that your Majesty will not disapprove of
the use which he made of a confidential note from your Majesty.

As your Majesty kindly permitted Sir Robert Peel to send occasionally
letters to your Majesty of a private rather than a public character,
he ventures to enclose one from the Duke of Wellington on the subject
of the appointment of Governor-General.

Sir Robert Peel had observed to the Duke of Wellington that he
had great confidence in Lord Ellenborough's integrity, unremitting
industry, and intimate knowledge of Indian affairs; that his only
fear was that Lord Ellenborough might err from _over-activity_ and
eagerness--but that he hoped his tendency to hasty decisions would be
checked by the experience and mature judgment of Indian advisers on
the spot.

The Duke of Wellington's comments have reference to these observations
of Sir Robert Peel. Your Majesty will nevertheless perceive that the
Duke considers, upon the whole, "that Lord Ellenborough is better
qualified than any man in England for the office of Governor-General."

    [Footnote 122: He was Joint Chief Clerk of the Pleas in the
    Queen's Bench, a sinecure conferred on him by his father, who
    was Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, 1802-1818.]




[Pageheading: AFFAIRS IN SPAIN]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _12th October 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--- ... Respecting the Spanish affairs,[123] I can
give you perfectly satisfactory intelligence concerning the Infants'
return. Espartero sees them return with the greatest regret, but said
he felt he could not prevent them from doing so. If, however, they
should be found to intrigue at all, they will not be allowed to
remain. Respecting a marriage with the eldest son of Dona Carlotta, I
know _positively_ that Espartero _never_ would _hear_ of it; but, on
the other hand, he is equally strongly opposed to poor little Isabel
marrying any French Prince, and I must add that _we_ could _never
allow that_. You will see that I have given you a frank and fair
account....

    [Footnote 123: The Queen-mother, who was living in Paris, had
    been deprived by a vote of the Cortes of the guardianship of
    the young Queen, Isabella II., and risings in her interest now
    took place at Pampeluna and Vittoria. On the 7th October, a
    bold attempt was made at Madrid to storm the Palace and get
    possession of the person of the young Queen. Queen Christina
    denied complicity, but the Regent, Espartero, suspended
    her pension on the ground that she had encouraged the
    conspirators.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _12th October 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and returns
many thanks for the letter received yesterday informing Lord Melbourne
of the time of your Majesty's coming to London. Lord Melbourne
earnestly hopes that your Majesty continues well.

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear of the appointment of Lord
Ellenborough. The reasons which your Majesty gives are sound and just,
and it is of great importance that a man not only of great ability but
of high station, and perfectly in the confidence of the Government at
home, should be named to this important post. Lord Ellenborough is a
man of great abilities, of much knowledge of India, of great industry
and of very accurate habits of business, and Lord Melbourne knows of
no objection to his appointment, except the loss of him here, where,
whether in or out of office, he has always been of great service.
He has hitherto been an unpopular man and his manners have been
considered contemptuous and overbearing, but he is evidently much
softened and amended in this respect, as most men are by time,
experience, and observation. Lord Fitzgerald[124] is a very able
public man, Lord Melbourne would say one of the most able, if not the
most able they have; but Lord Melbourne is told by others, who know
Lord Fitzgerald better, that Lord Melbourne overrates him. He is a
very good speaker, he has not naturally much industry, and his
health is bad, which will probably disable him from a very close and
assiduous attention to business. It is, however, upon the whole an
adequate appointment, and he is perhaps more likely to go on smoothly
with the Court of Directors, which is a great matter, than Lord
Ellenborough.

    [Footnote 124: On Lord Ellenborough becoming Governor-General,
    Lord Fitzgerald and Vesci, an ex-M.P., and former Chancellor
    of the Irish Exchequer, succeeded him at the Board of
    Control.]




[Pageheading: FRANCE AND SPAIN]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _16th October 1841._

Lord Aberdeen, with his most humble duty, begs to lay before
your Majesty a private letter from M. Guizot, which has just been
communicated to him by M. de Ste-Aulaire, on the recent attempt
in favour of Queen Christina in Spain. Your Majesty will see that
although M. Guizot denies, with every appearance of sincerity, all
participation of the French Government in this attempt, he does not
conceal that it has their cordial good wishes for its success. These
feelings, on the part of such a Government as that of France, will
probably be connected with practical assistance of some kind, although
M. Guizot's declarations may perhaps be literally true.




_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

The Queen must say that she fears the French are at the bottom of it,
for their jealousy of our influence in Spain is such, that the Queen
fears they would not be indisposed to see civil war to a certain
degree restored rather than that Spain should go on quietly supported
by us.[125] The Queen, however, hopes that, as far as it is possible,
the English Government will support the present Regent, who is
thoroughly attached to England, and who, from all that the Queen
hears of him, is the fittest man they have in Spain for the post he
occupies; and indeed matters till now had gone on much more quietly
than they had for some time previous, since Espartero is at the head
of the Government. The French intrigues should really be frustrated.
The Queen certainly thinks that M. Guizot's veracity is generally not
to be doubted, but the conduct of France regarding Spain has always
been very equivocal.

    [Footnote 125: See _post_, p. 349. (Ch. X, 17th October, 1841)]




[Pageheading: MASTERSHIP OF TRINITY]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

_16th October 1841._

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave to
acquaint your Majesty that the Master of Trinity College, Cambridge,
has formally signified his wish to retire from the duties of that
important trust.

Sir Robert Peel has reason to believe that it would be advantageous
that the selection of a successor to Dr. Wordsworth should be made
from members of Trinity College who are or have been fellows of the
College. Of these, the most eminent in respect to the qualifications
required in the office of Master, and to academical distinction,
are:--

    Professor Whewell.[126]
    The Rev. Mr Martin,[127] Bursar of the College.
    The Rev. Dr Wordsworth,[128] Head Master of Harrow School,
        and son of the present Master of Trinity.

The latter is a highly distinguished scholar, but his success as Head
Master of Harrow has not been such as to overcome the objection which
applies on general grounds to the succession of a father by a son in
an office of this description.

Professor Whewell is a member of Trinity College of the highest
scientific attainments. His name is probably familiar to your Majesty
as the author of one of the Bridgewater Treatises,[129] and of other
works which have attracted considerable notice.

He is a general favourite among all who have had intercourse with him
from his good temper and easy and conciliatory manners. Though not
_peculiarly_ eminent as a divine (less so at least than a writer on
scientific and philosophical subjects), his works manifest a deep
sense of the importance of religion and sound religious views. The
Archbishop of Canterbury[130] and the Bishop of London[131] (himself
of Trinity College) incline to think that the most satisfactory
appointment upon the whole would be that of Professor Whewell.

Sir Robert Peel, after making every enquiry into the subject, and with
a deep conviction of the importance of the appointment, has arrived at
the same conclusion, and humbly therefore recommends to your Majesty
that Professor Whewell should succeed Dr Wordsworth as Master of
Trinity College, Cambridge.

    [Footnote 126: Then Knightsbridge Professor of Moral
    Philosophy.]

    [Footnote 127: Francis Martin, afterwards Vice-Master, died
    1868.]

    [Footnote 128: Christopher Wordsworth, afterwards Bishop of
    Lincoln.]

    [Footnote 129: By the will (dated 1825) of the eighth Earl
    of Bridgewater--who must not be confounded with the third and
    last Duke, projector of inland navigation--£8,000 was left
    for the best work on the "Goodness of God as manifested in
    the Creation." The money was divided amongst eight persons,
    including Whewell, who wrote on Astronomy considered in
    reference to Natural Theology.]

    [Footnote 130: William Howley.]

    [Footnote 131: O. J. Blomfield.]




[Pageheading: QUEEN ISABELLA]

[Pageheading: THE SPANISH MARRIAGE]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

_17th October 1841._

The Queen received Lord Aberdeen's letter yesterday evening, and quite
approves of the draft to Mr Aston, and of Lord Aberdeen's having sent
it off at once. Her earnest wish is that the English Government should
be firm, and uphold the Regent as far as it is in our power. The Queen
has perused M. Guizot's letter with great attention, but she cannot
help fearing that assistance and encouragement has been given in
some shape or other to the revolts which have taken place. The Queen
Christina's residence at Paris is very suspicious, and much to be
regretted; every one who saw the Queen and knew her when Regent, knew
her to be clever and _capable_ of governing, had she but attended
to her duties. This she did not, but wasted her time in frivolous
amusements and neglected her children sadly, and finally left them.
It was her _own_ doing, and therefore it is not the kindest conduct
towards her children, but the very _worst_, to try and disturb the
tranquillity of a country which was just beginning to recover from the
baneful effects of one of the most bloody civil wars imaginable.

The Queen is certain that Lord Aberdeen will feel with her of what
importance it is to England that Spain should not become subject to
French interests, as it is evident _France wishes_ to make it. The
marriage of Queen Isabel is a most important question, and the Queen
is likewise certain that Lord Aberdeen sees at once that we could
never let her marry a French Prince. Ere long the Queen must speak to
Lord Aberdeen on this subject. In the meantime the Queen thought
it might be of use to Lord Aberdeen to put him in possession of her
feelings on the state of Spain, in which the Queen has always taken a
very warm interest.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

PANSHANGER, _21st October 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
here yesterday your Majesty's letter of the 19th inst., and he
earnestly hopes that your Majesty has arrived quite safe and well in
London. Besides the family, we have had hardly anybody here except
Lady Clanricarde.[132] Yesterday Sir Edward L. Bulwer[133] came,
beating his brother hollow in ridiculousness of attire, ridiculous as
the other is. He has, however, much in him, and is agreeable when you
come to converse with him....

Lord Melbourne is rather in doubt about his own movements. Lord
Leicester[134] presses him much to go to Holkham, where Lord
Fortescue,[135] Mr Ellice[136] and others are to be, and considering
Lord Leicester's age, Lord Melbourne thinks that it will gratify him
to see Lord Melbourne again there. But at Holkham they shoot from
morning until night, and if you do not shoot you are like a fish
upon dry land. Lord Melbourne hardly feels equal to the exertion, and
therefore thinks that he shall establish himself for the present
at Melbourne, where he will be within reach of Trentham, Beau
Desert,[137] Wentworth,[138] and Castle Howard,[139] if he likes to
go to them. The only annoyance is that it is close to Lord and Lady
G----, whom he will be perpetually meeting.

    [Footnote 132: A daughter of George Canning, the Prime
    Minister.]

    [Footnote 133: Afterwards Lord Lytton, the novelist.]

    [Footnote 134: The famous country gentleman, "Mr Coke of
    Norfolk."]

    [Footnote 135: Hugh, second Earl, K.G.]

    [Footnote 136: The Right Hon. Edward Ellice, M.P. ("Bear"
    Ellice).]

    [Footnote 137: Near Lichfield, a seat of Lord Anglesey.]

    [Footnote 138: Lord Fitzwilliam's house, near Rotherham.]

    [Footnote 139: Lord Carlisle's house, near York, built by
    Vanbrugh.]




[Pageheading: HOLLAND AND BELGIUM]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _22 October 1841._

... In France there is a great outcry that a Bourbon must be the
future husband of the Queen of Spain, etc. I must say that as the
Spaniards and the late King changed themselves the Salic custom which
Philip V. had brought from France,[140] it is natural for the rest of
Europe to wish that no Bourbon should go there. Besides, it must be
confessed that the thing is not even easy, as there is great hatred
amongst the various branches of that family. The King of the French
himself has always been _opposed_ to the idea of one of his sons going
there; in France, however, that opinion still exists, and Thiers had
it, strongly.

I confess that I regret that Queen Christina was encouraged to
settle at Paris, as it gave the thing the appearance of something
preconcerted. I believe that a wish existed that Christina would
retire peaceably and _par la force des circonstances_, but now this
took a turn which I am sure the King does not like; it places him,
besides, into _une position ingrate_; the Radicals hate him, the
Moderates will cry out that he has left them in the lurch, and the
Carlists are kept under key, and of course also not much pleased. I
meant to have remained in my wilds till yesterday, but my Ministers
were so anxious for my return, there being a good many things on the
_tapis_, that I came back on Tuesday, the 19th....

Here one is exactly shut up as if one was in a menagerie, walking
round and round like a tame bear. One breathes here also a mixture
of all sorts of moist compounds, which one is told is fresh air, but
which is not the least like it. I suppose, however, that my neighbour
in Holland, where they have not even got a hill as high as yours in
Buckingham Gardens, would consider Laeken as an Alpine country. The
tender meeting of the old King and the new King,[141] as one can
hardly call him a young King, must be most amusing. I am told that if
the old King had not made that love-match, he would be perfectly
able to dethrone his son; I heard that yesterday from a person rather
attached to the son and hating the father. In the meantime, though
one can hardly say that he is well at home, some strange mixture of
cut-throats and ruined soldiers of fortune had a mind to play us some
tricks here; we have got more and more insight into this. Is it by
instigation from him personally, or does he only know of it without
being a party to it? That _is_ difficult to tell, the more so as he
makes immense demonstration of friendly dispositions towards us,
and me in particular. I would I could make a _chassez croisez_ with
Otho;[142] he would be the gainer in solids, and I should have sun and
an interesting country; I will try to make him understand this, the
more so as you do not any longer want me in the West.

    [Footnote 140: The Pragmatic Sanction of Philip V. was
    repealed in 1792 by the Cortes, but the repeal was not
    promulgated by the King. Under the Salic Law, Don Carlos would
    have been on the throne. See _ante_, p. 44. (Ch. V, Footnote 9)]

    [Footnote 141: William I., who had abdicated in order to marry
    again, and William II., his son, who was nearly fifty.]

    [Footnote 142: The King of Greece, elected in 1833.]




[Pageheading: AMBASSADORS' AUDIENCES]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

_25th October 1841._

With respect to the appointment of Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench,
the Queen approves of Mr Pennefather[143] for that office. The Queen
may be mistaken, for she is not very well acquainted with the judicial
officers in Ireland, but it strikes her that Serjeant Jackson belonged
to the very violent Orange party in Ireland, and if this should be the
case she suggests to Sir Robert Peel whether it would not be better
_not_ to appoint him. If, on the other hand, the Queen should be
mistaken as to his political opinions, she would not disapprove of his
succeeding Mr Pennefather.

The Queen saw in the papers that Lord Stuart de Rothesay is already
gone. The Queen can hardly believe this, as no Ambassador or Minister
_ever_ left England without previously asking for an Audience and
receiving one, as the Queen wishes always to see them before they
repair to their posts. Would Sir Robert be so very good as to ask Lord
Aberdeen whether Lord Stuart de Rothesay is gone or not, and if he
should be, to tell Lord Aberdeen that in future she would wish
him always to inform her when they intend to go, and to ask for an
Audience, which, if the Queen is well, she would always grant. It is
possible that as the Queen said the other day that she did not wish
to give many Audiences after the Council, that Lord Aberdeen may have
misunderstood this and thought the Queen would give none, which was
_not_ her intention. The Queen would be thankful to Sir Robert if he
would undertake to clear up this mistake, which she is certain (should
Lord Stuart be gone) arose entirely from misapprehension.

The Queen also wishes Sir Robert to desire Lord Haddington to send her
some details of the intended reductions in the Fleet which she sees by
a draft of Lord Aberdeen's to Mr Bulwer have taken place.[144]

    [Footnote 143: Recently appointed Solicitor-General; Sergeant
    J. D. Jackson now succeeded him.]

    [Footnote 144: The statement of the Royal Navy in Commission
    at the beginning of 1841 sets out 160 vessels carrying 4,277
    guns.]




[Pageheading: STOCKMAR AND MELBOURNE]

[Pageheading: STOCKMAR'S ADVICE]


_Memorandum by Baron Stockmar._

_25th October 1841._

... I told [Lord Melbourne] that, as I read the English Constitution,
it meant to assign to _the Sovereign in his functions a deliberative
part_--that I was not sure the Queen had the means within herself to
execute this deliberative part properly, but I was sure that the only
way for her to execute her functions at all was to be strictly honest
to those men who at the time being were her Ministers. That it was
chiefly on this account that I had been so very sorry to have found
now, on my return from the Continent, that on the change of the
Ministry a capital opportunity to read a great Constitutional maxim
to the Queen had not only been lost by Lord Melbourne, but that he had
himself turned an instrument for working great good into an instrument
which must produce mischief and danger. That I was afraid that, from
what Lord Melbourne had been so weak as to have allowed himself to be
driven into, _against his own and better conviction_, the Queen must
have received a most pernicious bias, which on any future occasion
would make her inclined to act in a similar position similarly to that
what she does now, being convinced that what she does _now_ must be
right on all future occasions, or else Lord Melbourne would not have
sanctioned it. Upon this, Lord Melbourne endeavoured to palliate, to
represent the danger, which would arise from his secret correspondence
with the Queen as very little, to adduce precedents from history,
and to screen his present conduct behind what he imagined Lord Bute's
conduct had been under George III.[145] I listened patiently, and
replied in the end: All this might be mighty fine and quite calculated
to lay a flattering unction on his own soul, or it might suffice to
tranquillize the minds of the Prince and Anson, but that I was too old
to find the slightest argument in what I had just now heard, nor could
it in any way allay my apprehension. I began then to dissect all
that he had produced for his excusation, and showed him--as I thought
clearly, and as he admitted convincingly--that it would be impossible
to carry on this secret commerce with the Sovereign for any length
of time without exposing the Queen's character and creating mighty
embarrassments in the quiet and regular working of a Constitutional
machine.

My representations seemed to make a very deep impression, and Lord
Melbourne became visibly nervous, perplexed, and distressed. After
he had recovered a little I said, "I never was inclined to obtrude
advice; but if you don't dislike to hear my opinion, I am prepared to
give it to you." He said, "What is it?" I said, "You allow the Queen's
confinement to pass over quietly, and you wait till her perfect
recovery of it. As soon as this period has arrived, you state of
your own accord to Her Majesty that this secret and confidential
correspondence with her must cease; that you gave in to it, much
against your feelings, and with a decided notion of its impropriety
and danger, and merely out of a sincere solicitude to calm Her
Majesty's mind in a critical time, and to prevent the ill effects
which great and mental agitation might have produced on her health.
That this part of your purpose now being most happily achieved, you
thought yourself in duty bound to advise Her Majesty to _cease all
her communications_ to you on political subjects, as you felt it wrong
within yourself to receive them, and to return your political advice
and opinions on such matters; that painful as such a step must be to
your feelings, which to the last moment of your life will remain those
of the most loyal attachment and devotion to the Queen's person, it
is dictated to you by a deep sense of what you owe to the country, to
your Sovereign, and to yourself."

    [Footnote 145: For some time after the accession of George
    III., Bute, though neither in the Cabinet nor in Parliament,
    was virtually Prime Minister, but he became Secretary of State
    on 25th March 1761. George II. had disliked him, but he was
    generally believed to have exercised an undue influence over
    the consort of Prince Frederic of Wales, mother of George
    III.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

_26th October 1841._

With respect to Serjeant Jackson, the Queen will not oppose his
appointment, in consequence of the high character Sir Robert Peel
gives him; but she cannot refrain from saying that she very much fears
that the favourable effect which has hitherto been produced by the
formation of so mild and conciliatory a Government in Ireland, may
be endangered by this appointment, which the Queen would sincerely
regret.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _26th October 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and returns
your Majesty the letters of the King of the Belgians, with many
thanks. It certainly is a very unfortunate thing that the Queen
Christina was encouraged to fix her residence at Paris, and the
suspicion arising, therefore, cannot but be very injurious both to the
King of the French and to the French nation.

Lord Melbourne returns his warmest thanks for your Majesty's kind
expressions. He felt the greatest pleasure at seeing your Majesty
again and looking so well, and he hopes that his high spirits did
not betray him into talking too much or too heedlessly, which he is
conscious that they sometimes do.

The King Leopold, Lord Melbourne perceives, still hankers after
Greece; but Crowns will not bear to be chopped and changed about in
this manner. These new Kingdoms are not too firmly fixed as it is, and
it will not do to add to the uncertainty by alteration....




[Pageheading: DISPUTE WITH UNITED STATES]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _28th October 1841._

... Sir Robert Peel humbly assures your Majesty that he fully
participates in the surprise which your Majesty so naturally expresses
at the extraordinary intimation conveyed to Mr Fox[146] by the
President of the United States.[147]

Immediately after reading Mr Fox's despatch upon that subject, Sir
Robert Peel sought an interview with Lord Aberdeen. The measure
contemplated by the President is a perfectly novel one, a measure of a
hostile and unjustifiable character adopted with pacific intentions.

Sir Robert Peel does not comprehend the object of the President,
and giving him credit for the desire to prevent the interruption of
amicable relations with this country, Sir Robert Peel fears that
the forcible detention of the British Minister, after the demand of
passports, will produce a different impression on the public mind,
both here and in the United States, from that which the President must
(if he be sincere) have anticipated. It appears to Sir Robert Peel
that the object which the President professes to have in view would be
better answered by the immediate compliance with Mr Fox's demand for
passports, and the simultaneous despatch of a special mission to this
country conveying whatever explanations or offers of reparation the
President may have in contemplation.

Sir Robert Peel humbly assures your Majesty that he has advised
such measures of preparation to be taken in respect to the amount of
disposable naval force, and the position of it, as without bearing
the character of menace or causing needless disquietude and alarm, may
provide for an unfavourable issue of our present differences with the
United States.

Sir Robert Peel fears that when the President ventured to make to Mr
Fox the communication which he did make, he must have laboured under
apprehension that M'Leod might be executed in spite of the efforts of
the general Government of the United States to save his life.

    [Footnote 146: British Minister at Washington.]

    [Footnote 147: One Alexander M'Leod was tried at Utica on
    the charge of being implicated in the destruction of the
    _Caroline_ (an American vessel engaged in carrying arms to the
    Canadian rebels), in 1837, and in the death of Mr Durfee, an
    American. The vessel had been boarded by Canadian loyalists
    when lying in American waters, set on fire and sent over
    Niagara Falls, and in the affray Durfee was killed. M'Leod
    was apprehended on American territory, and hence arose the
    friction between the two countries. M'Leod was acquitted 12th
    October 1841.]




[Pageheading: PORTUGAL]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _31st October 1841._

The Queen received yesterday evening Lord Aberdeen's letter with the
accompanying despatches and draft. She certainly _is_ surprised at the
strange and improper tone in which Lord Howard's[148] despatches are
written, and can only attribute them to an over-eager and, she fully
believes, mistaken feeling of the danger to which he believes the
throne of the Queen to be exposed.

The Queen has carefully perused Lord Aberdeen's draft, which she
highly approves, but wishes to suggest to Lord Aberdeen whether upon
further consideration it might not perhaps be as well to _soften_ the
words under which she has drawn a pencil line, as she fears they might
irritate Lord Howard very much.

The Queen is induced to copy the following sentences from a letter she
received from her cousin, the King of Portugal, a few days ago, and
which it may be satisfactory to Lord Aberdeen to see:--

"_Je dois encore vous dire que nous avons toutes les raisons de nous
louer de la manière dont le Portugal est traité par votre Ministre des
Affaires Étrangères, et nous ferons de notre côté notre possible pour
prouver notre bonne volonté."_

    [Footnote 148: Lord Howard de Walden, Minister Plenipotentiary
    at Lisbon.]




[Pageheading: SECRETARIES OF STATE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _1st November 1841._

... Now for His Royal Highness's questions....

How the power of Prime Ministry grew up into its present form it is
difficult to trace precisely, as well as how it became attached, as
it were, to the office of First Commissioner of the Treasury. But
Lord Melbourne apprehends that Sir Robert Walpole was the first man
in whose person this union of powers was decidedly established, and
that its being so arose from the very great confidence which both
George I. and George II. reposed in him, and from the difficulty which
they had in transacting business, particularly George I., from their
imperfect knowledge of the language of the country.

With respect to the Secretary of State, Lord Melbourne is not prepared
from memory to state the dates at which the different arrangements of
that office have taken place. There was originally but one officer,
and at the present the three are but the heads of the different
departments of one office. The first division was into two, and they
were called the Secretary for the Northern and the Secretary for
the Southern department. They drew a line across the world, and each
transacted the business connected with the countries within his
own portion of the globe. Another division then took place, and the
Foreign affairs were confided to one Secretary of State, and the Home
and Colonial affairs to the other; but the present arrangement was
finally settled in the year 1793, when the junction was formed between
Mr Pitt on the one hand, and those friends of Mr Fox who left him
because they differed with him upon the French Revolution. The Home
affairs were placed in the hands of one Secretary of State, the
Foreign of another, and the Colonial and Military affairs of a third,
and this arrangement has continued ever since.[149] The persons then
appointed were the Duke of Portland,[150] Lord Grenville,[151] and Mr
Dundas,[152] Home, Foreign, and Colonial Secretaries.

Writing from recollection, it is very possible that Lord Melbourne may
be wrong in some of the dates which he has ventured to specify.[153]

    [Footnote 149: A fourth Secretary of State was added at
    the time of the Crimean War, so as to separate Colonial and
    Military affairs, and a fifth after the Indian Mutiny to
    supersede the President of the Board of Control. _See_ Lord
    Melbourne's letter of 31st December 1837, _ante_, p. 100.
      (Ch. VI, 'State Departments')]

    [Footnote 150: Third Duke (1738-1809).]

    [Footnote 151: William Wyndham, Lord Grenville (1759-1834).]

    [Footnote 152: Henry Dundas (1742-1811), afterwards Lord
    Melville.]

    [Footnote 153: See _post_, pp. 358, 359.
      (Ch. X, 'The English Constitution', et seq.)]




[Pageheading: THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _4th November 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has this
morning had the honour and pleasure of receiving your Majesty's letter
of yesterday....

Lord Melbourne sends a letter which he has received from his sister,
which may not be unentertaining. Lady Palmerston is struck, as
everybody is who goes to Ireland, with the candid warmth and vehement
demonstration of feeling. England always appears cold, heartless, and
sulky in comparison....

With respect to the questions put to me by your Majesty at the desire
of His Royal Highness, Lord Melbourne begs leave to assure your
Majesty that he will be at all times most ready and anxious to give
any information in his power upon points of this sort, which are very
curious, very important, very worthy to be enquired into, and
upon which accurate information is not easily to be found. All the
political part of the English Constitution is fully understood,
and distinctly stated in Blackstone and many other books, but the
Ministerial part, the work of conducting the executive government, has
rested so much on practice, on usage, on understanding, that there is
no publication to which reference can be made for the explanation
and description of it. It is to be sought in debates, in protests, in
letters, in memoirs, and wherever it can be picked up. It seems to
be stupid not to be able to say at once when two Secretaries of State
were established; but Lord Melbourne is not able. He apprehends that
there was but one until the end of Queen Anne's reign, and that two
were instituted by George I., probably because upon his frequent
journeys to Hanover he wanted the Secretary of State with him, and at
the same time it was necessary that there should be an officer of the
same authority left at home to transact the domestic affairs.

_Prime Minister_ is a term belonging to the last century. Lord
Melbourne doubts its being to be found in English Parliamentary
language previously. Sir Robert Walpole was always accused of having
introduced and arrogated to himself an office previously unknown to
the Law and Constitution, that of Prime or Sole Minister, and we learn
from Lady Charlotte Lindsay's[154] accounts of her father, that in his
own family Lord North would never suffer himself to be called _prime_
Minister, because it was an office unknown to the Constitution. This
was a notion derived from the combined Whig and Tory opposition to Sir
Robert Walpole, to which Lord North and his family had belonged.

Lord Melbourne is very sorry to hear that the Princess Royal continues
to suffer from some degree of indisposition. From what your Majesty
had said more than once before, Lord Melbourne had felt anxiety upon
this subject, and he saw the Baron yesterday, who conversed with him
much upon it, and informed him of what had taken place. Lord Melbourne
hopes that your Majesty will attribute it only to Lord Melbourne's
anxious desire for the security and increase of your Majesty's
happiness, if he ventures to say that the Baron appears to him to have
much reason in what he urges, and in the view which he takes. It is
absolutely required that confidence should be reposed in those who
are to have the management and bear the responsibility, and that they
should not be too much interrupted or interfered with.

    [Footnote 154: Daughter of Lord North (afterwards Earl of
    Guilford) and wife of Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. John Lindsay.
    She lived till 1849--a link with the past.]




[Pageheading: SECRETARIES OF STATE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _5th November 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. Not feeling
satisfied of the correctness of the information which he had given to
your Majesty respecting the office of Secretary of State, he yesterday
evening requested Mr Allen[155] to look into the matter, and he has
just received from him the enclosed short memorandum, which he has the
honour of transmitting to your Majesty. This shows that Lord Melbourne
was quite wrong with respect to the period at which two Secretaries
of State were first employed, and that it was much earlier than he had
imagined.

The year 1782, when the third Secretary of State was abolished, was
the period of the adoption of the great measure of Economical Reform
which had been introduced by Mr. Burke in 1780.

The present arrangement was settled in 1794, which is about the time
which Lord Melbourne stated.

    [Footnote 155: Secretary and Librarian at Holland House.]




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE'S POSITION]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _7th November 1841._

... Your Majesty asks whether Lord Melbourne thinks that Prince
Metternich holds the opinion of Sir Robert Gordon, which he expresses
to Lord Beauvale. It is difficult to say what Prince Metternich's
real sentiments are. Lord Melbourne takes him not to have a very high
opinion of the abilities of others in general, and he is not unlikely
to depreciate Sir Robert Gordon to Lord Beauvale. Sir Robert Gordon is
a man of integrity, but he is tiresome, long and pompous, which cannot
be agreeable to the Prince, who has about him much of the French
vivacity, and also much of their settled and regular style of
argument....

With respect to the latter part of your Majesty's letter, Lord
Melbourne returns for the expressions of your Majesty's kindness his
warm and grateful thanks. Your Majesty may rest assured that he will
always speak to your Majesty without scruple or reserve, and that he
will never ask anything of your Majesty, or ever make a suggestion,
which he does not consider to be for your Majesty's service and
advantage. Lord Melbourne is of opinion that his visits to the Palace
should not only avoid exciting suspicion and uneasiness in your
Majesty's present advisers, a result of which he has very little
apprehension, but they should not be so frequent as to attract public
notice, comment, and observation, of which he would be more fearful.
A public rumour, however unfounded and absurd, has more force in this
country than objections which have in them more of truth and reality.
Upon these grounds, and as your Majesty will probably not see much
company at present, and the parties therefore will be a good deal
confined to the actual Household, Lord Melbourne thinks it would
perhaps be as well if he were not again to dine at the Palace at
present.

The course which it may be prudent to take hereafter will depend very
much upon that which cannot now be foreseen, namely, upon the general
course which will be taken by politics and political parties. In this
Lord Melbourne does not at present discern his way, and he will
not therefore hazard opinions which would not be founded upon any
certainty, and might be liable to immediate change and alteration.




[Pageheading: STOCKMAR'S ADVICE]

[Pageheading: STOCKMAR'S EXPOSTULATIONS]


_Memorandum: Baron Stockmar to Viscount Melbourne._

_23 November 1841._

The apprehension which haunts me since my return to England is well
known to you. It was my intention to have written to you upon it some
time hereafter, but the contents of a certain letter, sent by you just
before your departure, accelerates the execution of my design. From
your own expressions used some time back, I was led to expect that you
would be glad to take advantage _of any fair opportunity_ which might
contribute towards that devoutly to be wished for object, viz., to let
a certain correspondence die a natural death. You may easily conceive
how much I felt disappointed when I heard that you had written
again, without a challenge, and that, without apparent cause, you had
volunteered the promise to write from time to time. This happens at
a moment when _your_ harassing apprehension received new life and
strength from two incidents which I think it my duty to make known to
you, and of which the one came to pass _before_, the other after, your
departure from here. Some weeks back I was walking in the streets with
Dr Prætorius,[156] when, finding myself opposite the house of one
of my friends, it came across my mind to give him a call. Prætorius
wanted to leave me, on a conception that, as a stranger, he might
obstruct the freedom of our conversation. I insisted, however, on his
remaining with me, and we were shown into the drawing-room, where
in all there were five of us. For some minutes the conversation had
turned on insignificant things, when the person talking to me said
quite abruptly: "So I find the Queen is in daily correspondence with
Lord Melbourne." I replied, "Who told you this?" The answer was, "Mrs
Norton; she told me the other evening. Don't you believe that Lord
Melbourne has lost his influence over the Queen's mind; he daily
writes to her, and receives as many answers, in which she communicates
everything to him." Without betraying much emotion I said, "I don't
believe a word of it; the Queen may have written once or twice on
private matters, but the daily correspondence on all matters is
certainly the amplification of a thoughtless and imprudent person, who
is not aware of such exaggerated assertions." My speech was followed
by a general silence, after which we talked of other things, and
soon took our leave. When we were fairly in the open air, Prætorius
expressed to me his amazement at what he had heard, and he remained
for some time at a loss to comprehend the character of the person who,
from mere giddiness, let out so momentous a secret.

The other fact took place the day after you had left. From the late
events at Brussels, it had become desirable that I should see Sir
Robert Peel. From Belgium we travelled over to Home politics. I
expressed my delight at seeing the Queen so happy, and added a hope
that more and more she would seek and find her real happiness in her
domestic relations only. He evidently caught at this, and assured me
that he should at all times be too happy to have a share in anything
which might be thought conducive to the welfare of Her Majesty. That
no consideration of personal inconvenience would ever prevent him from
indulging the Queen in all her wishes relating to matters of a private
nature, and that the only return for his sincere endeavours to please
Her Majesty he looked to, was honesty in public affairs. Becoming then
suddenly emphatic, he continued, "But on this I must insist, and I
do assure you, that that moment I was to learn that the Queen takes
advice upon public matters in another place, I shall throw up; for
such a thing I conceive the country could not stand, and I would not
remain an hour, whatever the consequences of my resignation may be."

Fully sensible that he was talking at me, I received the charge with
the calmness of a good conscience, and our time being exhausted I
prepared for retreat. But he did not allow me to do so, before he had
found means to come a second time to the topic uppermost in his own
mind, and he repeated, it appeared to me with increased force of tone,
his determination to throw up, fearless of all consequences, that
moment he found himself and the country dishonestly dealt by.

I think I have now reported to you correctly the two occurrences which
of late have added so much to my antecedent suspicions and fears.
Permit me to join to this a few general considerations which, from
the nature of the recited incidents alone, and without the slightest
intervention of any other cause, must have presented themselves to my
mind. The first is, that I derive from the events related quite ground
enough for concluding that the danger I dread is great and imminent,
and that, if ill luck is to have its will, no human power can prevent
an explosion for a day, or even for an hour. The second is the
contemplation--what state will the Queen be placed in by such a
catastrophe? That in my position, portraying to myself all the
consequences of such a possibility, I look chiefly to the Queen, needs
hardly, I trust, an excuse.... Can you hope that the Queen's character
will ever recover from a shock received by a collision with Peel, upon
such a cause? Pray illustrate to yourself this particular question by
taking a purely political and general survey of the time and period
we live in at this moment. In doing so must you not admit that all
England is agreed that the Tories must have another trial, and that
there is a decided desire in the nation that it should be a fair
one? Would you have it said that Sir Robert Peel failed in his
trial, merely because the Queen alone was not fair to him, and that
principally you had aided her in the game of dishonesty? And can you
hope that this game can be played with security, even for a short
time only, when a person has means of looking into your cards whom
you yourself have described to me some years ago as a most passionate,
giddy, imprudent and dangerous woman? I am sure beforehand that
your loyalty and devotion has nothing to oppose to the force of my
exposition. There are, however, some other and minor reasons which
ought likewise to be considered before you come to the determination
of trusting entirely to possibilities and chance. For the results of
your deliberation you will have to come to will in their working and
effects go beyond yourself, and must affect two other persons. These
will have a right to expect that your decision will not be taken
regardless of that position, which accidental circumstances have
assigned to them, in an affair the fate of which is placed entirely
within your discretion. This is an additional argument why you should
deliberate very conscientiously. A mistake of yours in this respect
might by itself produce fresh difficulties and have a complicating and
perplexing retro effect upon the existing ones; because both, seeing
that they must be sufferers in the end, may begin to look only to
their own safety, and become inclined to refuse that passive obedience
which till now constitutes the vehicle of your hazardous enterprize.

Approaching the conclusion of this letter, I beg to remind you of a
conversation I had with you on the same subject in South Street, the
25th of last month.[157] Though you did not avow it then in direct
words, I could read from your countenance and manner that you assented
in your head and heart to all I had said, and in particular to the
advice I volunteered at the end of my speech. At that time I pointed
out to you a period when I thought a decisive step ought to be
taken on your part. This period seems to me to have arrived. Placing
unreserved confidence into your candour and manliness, I remain, for
ever, very faithfully yours,

STOCKMAR.

    [Footnote 156: Librarian and German Secretary to Prince
    Albert.]

    [Footnote 157: _Ante_, pp. 352-3. (Ch. X, 'Stockmar and Melbourne')]




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE'S REPLY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Baron Stockmar._

_24th November 1841._

(_Half-past 10_ P.M.)

MY DEAR BARON,--I have just received your letter; I think it
unnecessary to detain your messenger. I will write to you upon the
subject and send it through Anson. Yours faithfully,

MELBOURNE.




[Pageheading: THE HEIR APPARENT]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _29th November 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I have to thank you for four most kind letters, of
the 4th, 6th, 19th and 26th; the last I received yesterday. I would
have written sooner, had I not been a little bilious, which made
me very low, and not in spirits to write. The weather has been so
exceedingly relaxing, that it made me at the end of the fortnight
quite bilious, and this, you know, affects the spirits. I am much
better, but they think that I shall not get my appetite and spirits
back till I can get out of town; we are therefore going in a week at
latest. I am going for a drive this morning, and am certain it will
do me good. In all _essentials_, I am better, if possible, than last
year. Our little boy[158] is a wonderfully strong and large child,
with very large dark blue eyes, a finely formed but somewhat large
nose, and a pretty little mouth; I _hope_ and _pray_ he may be like
his dearest Papa. He is to be called _Albert_, and Edward is to be his
second name. Pussy, dear child, is still _the_ great pet amongst us
all, and is getting so fat and strong again.

I beg my most affectionate love to dearest Louise and the dear
children. The Queen-Dowager is recovering wonderfully.

I beg you to forgive this letter being so badly written, but my feet
are being rubbed, and as I have got the box on which I am writing on
my knee, it is not easy to write quite straight--but you must _not_
think my hand trembles. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Pussy is _not_ at all pleased with her brother.

    [Footnote 158: His Majesty King Edward VII., born 9th
    November.]




[Pageheading: THE INFANT PRINCE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

TRENTHAM, _1st December 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has had
the honour of receiving here your Majesty's letters of yesterday,
by which he learns with sincere pleasure and satisfaction that your
Majesty is so much recovered as to go to Windsor on so early a day as
your Majesty names. Lord Melbourne hears with great concern that your
Majesty has been suffering under depression and lowness of spirits....
Lord Melbourne well knows how to feel for those who suffer under it,
especially as he has lately had much of it himself.

Lord Melbourne is much rejoiced to hear so good an account of the Heir
Apparent and of the Princess Royal, and feels himself greatly obliged
by the information respecting the intended names and the sponsors.
Lord Melbourne supposes that your Majesty has determined yourself upon
the relative position of the two names, but _Edward_ is a good English
appellation, and has a certain degree of popularity attached to
it from ancient recollections. Albert is also an old Anglo-Saxon
name--the same, Lord Melbourne believes, as Ethelred--but it has not
been so common nor so much in use since the Conquest. However, your
Majesty's feelings, which Lord Melbourne perfectly understands, must
determine this point. The notion of the King of Prussia[159] gives
great satisfaction here, and will do so with all but Puseyites and
Newmanites and those who lean to the Roman Catholic faith. His strong
Protestant feelings, and his acting with us in the matter of the
Syrian Bishop, have made the King of Prussia highly popular in
this country, and particularly with the more religious part of the
community.

Your Majesty cannot offer up for the young Prince a more safe and
judicious prayer than that he may resemble his father. The character,
in Lord Melbourne's opinion, depends much upon the race, and on both
sides he has a good chance. Be not over solicitous about education. It
may be able to do much, but it does not do so much as is expected from
it. It may mould and direct the character, but it rarely alters it.
George IV. and the Duke of York were educated quite like English boys,
by English schoolmasters, and in the manner and upon the system of
English schools. The consequence was that, whatever were their faults,
they were quite Englishmen. The others, who were sent earlier abroad,
and more to foreign universities, were not quite so much so. The late
king was educated as a sailor, and was a complete sailor....

Lord Melbourne will tell your Majesty exactly what he thinks of John
Russell's reply to the Plymouth address. It is very angry and very
bitter, and anger and bitterness are never very dignified. Lord
Melbourne certainly would not have put in those sarcasms upon the Duke
of Wellington and Sir Robert Peel, for their change of opinion and
conduct upon the Roman Catholic question. But the tone of the rest
of the answer is, in Lord Melbourne's opinion, just and right. We
certainly delivered the affairs of the country into their hands in a
good state, both at home and abroad, and we should be acting unfairly
by ourselves if we did not maintain and assert this upon every
occasion. Lord Melbourne's notion of the conduct which he has to
pursue is, that it should not be aggressive, but that it must be
defensive. He would oppose no right measures, but he cannot suffer
the course of policy which has been condemned in him to be adopted by
others without observation upon the inconsistency and injustice....

Lord Melbourne concludes with again wishing your Majesty health and
happiness, and much enjoyment of the country.

    [Footnote 159: King Frederick William IV., who was to be a
    sponsor.]




[Pageheading: PRINCE OF WALES]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _6th December 1841._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty, begs to enclose for the Signature
of your Majesty the Letters Patent creating His Royal Highness,
the Prince of the United Kingdom, Prince of Wales and Earl of
Chester.[160]

Understanding that it is your Majesty's pleasure to have this Creation
inserted in the _Gazette_ of to-morrow night, Sir James Graham has
given directions, which will ensure the publication, though the
Letters Patent themselves may not be completed. The Warrant already
signed by your Majesty is a sufficient authority.

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's dutiful Subject and
Servant,

J. R. G. GRAHAM.

    [Footnote 160: His present Majesty had been referred to in
    letters of the previous month as the Duke of Cornwall. "Know
    ye," ran the present Letters Patent, "that we have made ...
    our most dear son, the Prince of the United Kingdom of Great
    Britain and Ireland (Duke of Saxony, Duke of Cornwall ...)
    Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester ... and him our said most
    dear son, ... as has been accustomed, we do ennoble and invest
    with the said Principality and Earldom, by girding him with
    a sword, by putting a coronet on his head, and a gold ring on
    his finger, and also by delivering a gold rod into his hand,
    that he may preside there, and may direct and defend those
    parts...."]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _7th December 1841._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--We arrived here _sains et saufs_ with our awfully
large Nursery Establishment yesterday morning. It was a nasty warm
and very rainy day, but to-day is very bright, clear and dry, and we
walked out early and felt like prisoners freed from some dungeon. Many
thanks for your kind letter of the 2nd, by which I grieve to see
that you are not quite well. But let me repeat again, you _must_ not
despond so; you must not be so out of spirits. I have likewise been
suffering so from _lowness_ that it made me quite miserable, and I
know how difficult it is to fight against it. I am delighted to hear
that all the children are so well. I wonder very much who our little
boy will be like. You will understand _how_ fervent my prayers and
I am [sure] _everybody's_ must be, to see him resemble his angelic
dearest Father in _every, every_ respect, both in body and mind. Oh!
my dearest Uncle, I am sure if you knew _how_ happy, how blessed I
feel, and how _proud_ I feel in possessing _such_ a perfect being as
my husband, as he is, and if you think that you have been instrumental
in bringing about this union, it must gladden your heart! How happy
should I be to see our child grow up _just_ like him! Dear Pussy
travelled with us and behaved like a grown-up person, so quiet and
looking about and coquetting with the Hussars on either side of the
carriage. Now adieu! Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: THE APPROACHING CHRISTENING]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

CASTLE HOWARD, _22nd December 1841._

... Lord Melbourne will consider himself most highly honoured by being
invited to the christening, and will hold himself in readiness to
attend, whenever it may take place. He has written to Mr Anson in
answer to the letter which he received from him this morning. Lord
Melbourne has been obliged to consent to receive an address from
Derby, and has fixed Monday the 27th inst. for that purpose. He could
have wished to have avoided this, but it was impossible, and he must
make the best of it that he can, which he conceives will be effected
by conceiving his reply in very guarded terms, and in a tone defensive
of his own administration, but not offensive to those who have
succeeded him....

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear of the feelings of the King of
Prussia. For religious matters he is at present very popular with many
in this country, and popularity, though transient and uncertain, is
a good thing while it lasts. The King of the Belgians should not be
surprised or mortified at the conduct of the King of Holland. We must
expect that people will act according to their nature and feelings.
The Union of Belgium and Holland has been for a long time the first
wish and the daily dream of the House of Orange. It has been the great
object of their lives, and by the separation, which took place in
1830, they saw their fondest hopes disappointed and destroyed at once.
It must be expected that under such a state of things, they will be
unquiet, and will try to obtain what they so eagerly desire and have
once possessed.

Lord Melbourne is much rejoiced to hear that your Majesty is in the
enjoyment of such good health. Your Majesty's observations upon your
own situation are in the highest degree just and prudent, and it is
a sign of a right mind and of good feelings to prize the blessings we
enjoy, and not to suffer them to be too much altered by circumstances,
which may not turn out exactly according to our wishes.




[Pageheading: THE UNITED STATES]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _24th December 1841._

Lord Aberdeen presents his most humble duty to your Majesty. He
ventures to request your Majesty's attention for a moment to the
character of your Majesty's present relations with the Government of
the United States. Your Majesty is aware that several questions of
great difficulty and importance have been long pending between the two
Governments.[161] Some of these have become more complicated than
they were ten years ago; and any of them might, at any moment, lead to
consequences of the most disastrous nature.

Instead of continuing negotiations, necessarily tedious and which
promise to be interminable, your Majesty's servants are humbly of
opinion that an effort ought to be made, by a Special Mission at
Washington, to bring all these differences promptly to an adjustment.
The public feeling in the United States at this time does not appear
to be unfavourable for such an attempt. Should it be undertaken by a
person whose rank, character, and abilities would ensure respect, and
whose knowledge of the subjects under discussion, and of the people of
the country, together with his conciliatory manners, would render him
generally acceptable, your Majesty might perhaps indulge the hope of a
successful result.

Lord Aberdeen humbly ventures to think that such a person may be found
in Lord Ashburton,[162] whom he submits for your Majesty's gracious
approbation.

    [Footnote 161: The question of the North-West Boundary had
    long been one source of dispute; another was the right the
    British Government claimed of searching vessels suspected of
    being engaged in the slave trade.]

    [Footnote 162: Alexander, first Lord Ashburton, who had held
    office in Peel's short Ministry, and married Miss Bingham of
    Philadelphia. See _post_, p. 461. (Ch. XII, Footnote 10)]




[Pageheading: CHRISTMAS]


_Memorandum by Mr Anson._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th December 1841._

Christmas has brought its usual routine of festivity and its agreeable
accompaniment of Christmas presents. The Queen was not at all well
again yesterday, being again troubled with lowness. The Melbourne
correspondence still is carried on, but I think not in its
pristine vigour by any means. He has taken no notice of the Baron's
remonstrance to him, and we are in the dark in what manner, if at all,
he means to deal with it.

I have sat by Her Majesty at dinner several times lately. I should say
that Her Majesty interests herself less and less about politics, and
that her dislike is less than it was to her present Ministers, though
she would not be prepared to acknowledge it. Her Majesty is a good
deal occupied with the little Princess Royal, who begins to assume
companionable qualities. In the evening, instead of her usual
conversation with her old Prime Minister, some round game at cards is
substituted, which always terminates at eleven. The Prince, to
amuse the Queen at this, has nearly left off his chess; his
amusements--shooting or hunting--always commence and terminate between
eleven and two, not to interfere with Her Majesty's arrangements, in
which he is included as her companion.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

MELBOURNE, _29th December 1841._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
here yesterday your Majesty's letter of the 25th inst., upon a paper
adorned with many quaint and humorous Christmas devices, and Lord
Melbourne begs to offer to your Majesty, most sincerely and most
fervently, the good wishes of the Season. Lord Melbourne will be in
town on Friday evening next, and after that day will wait upon your
Majesty, whenever your Majesty is pleased to command....

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear that the King of the Belgians is
reassured by his journey to Mons and his reception upon it. He need
not mind the King of Holland, if he can keep all right at Paris.

The railway smash[163] is awful and tremendous, as all railway mishaps
are, and Lord Melbourne fears must always be. These slips and falls
of earth from the banks are the greatest danger that now impends over
them, and if they take place suddenly and in the dark, Lord Melbourne
does not see how the fatal consequences of them are to be effectually
guarded against. They are peculiarly likely to happen now, as the
cuttings have been recently and hastily made, the banks are very
steep, and the season has been peculiarly wet, interrupted by severe
frosts.

Lord Melbourne received the deputation from Derby, a large and
respectable one, here on Monday last. The address was very guarded,
temperate, and judicious, and Lord Melbourne strove to construct his
answer in the same manner.

    [Footnote 163: This accident took place on 24th December in
    the Sonning Hill cutting, two and a half miles from Reading.
    Eight persons were killed on the spot.]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER XI


THE session was mainly occupied by the great Ministerial measure of
finance, direct taxation by means of income tax being imposed, and the
import duties on a large number of articles being removed or relaxed,
Mr Gladstone, now at the Board of Trade, taking charge of the bills.
Two more attempts on the Queen's life were made, the former again on
Constitution Hill by one Francis, whose capital sentence was commuted;
the latter by a hunchback, Bean, who was sentenced to eighteen months'
imprisonment. An Act was promptly passed to deal with such outrages
in future as misdemeanours, without giving them the importance of high
treason. Lord Ashley's Bill was passed, prohibiting woman and child
labour in mines and collieries. But the Anti-Corn Law League of
Manchester was not satisfied with the policy of the Government and
objected to the income tax; while riots broke out in the manufacturing
districts of the North.

In Afghanistan, the disasters of the previous year were retrieved; Sir
Robert Sale, who was gallantly defending Jellalabad, made a _sortie_
and defeated Akbar Khan; General Nott arrived at Ghuznee, but found it
evacuated; he destroyed the citadel and removed the Gates of Somnauth.
General Pollock swept the Khyber Pass and entered Cabul. The captives
taken on the retreat from Cabul were recovered--Lady Macnaghten and
Lady Sale among them. In retribution for the murder of Macnaghten,
the great bazaar of Cabul, where his remains had been dishonoured,
was destroyed by Pollock; the British force was then withdrawn. Dost
Mahommed made himself again ruler of Cabul, and a proclamation of
Lord Ellenborough announced that the British Government accepted any
Sovereign and Constitution approved by the Afghans themselves.

In China, also, operations were successfully terminated, Chapoo being
taken in May, and an attack by Admiral Parker upon Nanking being
only averted by the conclusion of a favourable treaty, involving
an indemnity, the cession by China of Hong Kong, and the opening of
important ports to commerce.

A dispute had arisen between this country and the United States as
to the boundary line between the latter country and the British
Possessions in North America. Lord Ashburton was accordingly sent
out on a special mission to effect the adjustment of this and other
disputes, and a treaty was concluded for the purpose of defining each
country's territorial rights, and imposing mutual obligations for the
suppression of the Slave Trade.




CHAPTER XI

1842


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

SUDBURY HALL, _4th January 1842._

MY DEAR NIECE,--Most grateful for your very amiable kind letter full
of good wishes for me, I hasten to answer it and to assure you that I
deeply feel all your affectionate kindness to me in wishing my life to
be prolonged. From ill-health I have become such a useless member of
your family, that I must wonder you have not long been tired of me. I
wish I was more able to be of any use to you which you might like
to make of me. My services would be most faithful, I can assure you.
Should my life be spared, there may perhaps yet be a time when I can
prove to you, that what I say is not merely a _façon de parler_, but
my sincere wish.

Your domestic happiness, dearest Victoria, gives me great satisfaction
whenever I think of it, and that is very often. God continue it so,
uninterrupted, is my daily prayer.

Your approbation of my little offering to my dear godchild gives me
much pleasure. It occupied me several days during my illness to make
the drawing, weak as I then was, and it was a _pleasant occupation_.

We have frost again, with a clear blue sky, which is much better for
me than the damp close weather of last week, which oppressed me so
much. I breathe again, and my spirits get their usual tone, which they
had lost, but I still cough a great deal, which is very fatiguing.

Will you kiss your darlings in my name and bless them, and pray
believe me ever, my dear Niece, your most affectionately devoted Aunt,

ADELAIDE.




[Pageheading: WINDSOR]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROADLANDS,[1] _5th January 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
return to your Majesty and to His Royal Highness his thanks for all
the kindness shown him at Windsor. He was very happy to find himself
there again and in your Majesty's society. He has seen many fine
places and much fine country, but after all there is nothing like
Windsor and the Park. Twenty very fine places might easily be made out
of the latter. Lord Melbourne as he drove to Bagshot was very glad to
see the plantations at and about Cumberland Lodge and onwards so well
and judiciously thinned. He had a very prosperous journey here. It is
a lovely place, with the greatest beauty that a place can have, a
very swift, clear, natural stream, running and winding in front of the
house. The whole place is much improved since Lord Melbourne saw it
last; a great deal of new pleasure-ground has been made. The trees,
cypresses, elders, planes, elms, white poplars and acacias are very
fine indeed....

Lord Melbourne thinks of staying here six or seven days, and then
returning to London and going to Brocket Hall and Panshanger, but
he has not fixed his plans decidedly, which he is never very fond of
doing.

Lord Melbourne was delighted at thinking that he left your Majesty
in good health, which he earnestly hopes and fervently prays may,
together with every other blessing, long continue.

    [Footnote 1: The house of Lord Palmerston in Hants.]




_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _6th January 1842._

... Sir Robert Peel has informed Lord Aberdeen that he had mentioned
to your Majesty the suggestion of the King of Prussia to confer the
Order of the Black Eagle[2] upon the Prince of Wales, immediately
after the christening of his Royal Highness. Lord Aberdeen therefore
abstains from troubling your Majesty with any observations on this
subject.

    [Footnote 2: Founded by Frederick I. in 1701.]




[Pageheading: DISASTERS IN AFGHANISTAN]


_Lord Fitzgerald to Queen Victoria._

_8th January 1842._

Lord Fitzgerald, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, begs
leave humbly to inform your Majesty that despatches have been this
day received at the India House from the Earl of Auckland,
Governor-General of India, which most officially confirm to too great
an extent the disastrous intelligence contained in the public journals
of yesterday, the particulars of which the editors of these journals
had received by express messengers from Marseilles.[3]

This intelligence is of a most painful character, and though the
details which have arrived do high honour to the courage and the
gallantry of your Majesty's forces, as well as of the East India
Company's Army, yet the loss sustained has been very great, and many
valuable officers have fallen the victims of a widespread conspiracy
which seems to have embraced within its confederation the most warlike
tribes of the Afghan nation.

Lord Fitzgerald begs leave most humbly to lay before your Majesty an
interesting despatch from Lord Auckland, comprising the most important
details of the late events in Afghanistan.

It is very satisfactory to Lord Fitzgerald to be enabled humbly to
acquaint your Majesty that Lord Auckland has decided on waiting
the arrival of his successor, Lord Ellenborough, and states to Lord
Fitzgerald that he will feel it to be his duty to remain in his
[Government], in the present critical state of affairs, until he is
relieved by the new Governor-General.

All of which is most humbly submitted to your Majesty, by your
Majesty's most dutiful Subject and Servant,

FITZGERALD AND VESCI.

    [Footnote 3: _See_ Introductory Note, 1841, _ante_, p. 254.
    The rebellion broke out at Cabul on 2nd November, and Sir
    Alexander Burnes was murdered. (Intro Note to Ch. X)]




[Pageheading: THE OXFORD MOVEMENT]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROADLANDS, _12th January 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has this
morning received your Majesty's letter of the 10th inst., and is glad
to infer from it that your Majesty and the Prince are both well and in
good spirits.

With respect to the Oxford affair, your Majesty is aware that for a
long time a serious difference has been fermenting and showing itself
in the Church of England, one party leaning back towards Popery, and
the other either wishing to keep doctrines as they are, or, perhaps,
to approach somewhat nearer to the dissenting Churches. This
difference has particularly manifested itself in a publication, now
discontinued, but which has been long going on at Oxford, entitled
_Tracts for the Times_, and generally called the Oxford Tracts. The
Professorship of Poetry is now vacant at Oxford, and two candidates
have been put forward, the one Mr Williams, who is the author of one
or two of the most questionable of the Oxford Tracts, and the other Mr
Garbett, who is a representative of the opposite party. Of course the
result of this election, which is made by the Masters of Arts of the
University, is looked to with much interest and anxiety, as likely
to afford no unequivocal sign of which is the strongest party in the
University and amongst the clergy generally. It is expected that Mr
Garbett will be chosen by a large majority....




[Pageheading: THE MORNING CHRONICLE]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _17th January 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs to
acknowledge your Majesty's letter of the 15th, which he has received
here this morning.

Lord Melbourne does not think this Puseyite difference in the Church
so serious or dangerous as others do. If it is discreetly managed,
it will calm down or blow over or sink into disputes of little
significance. All Lord Melbourne fears is lest the Bishops should be
induced to act hastily and should get into the wrong. The Puseyites
have the most learning, or rather, have considered the points more
recently and more accurately than their opponents.

Lord Melbourne hopes that the Spanish affair will be settled.
Lord Melbourne cannot doubt that the French are wrong. Even if the
precedents are in their favour, the Spanish Court has a right to
settle its own etiquette and its own mode of transacting business, and
to change them if it thinks proper.[4]

Lord Melbourne was at Broadlands when the Article to which your
Majesty alludes appeared in the _Morning Chronicle_, and he talked
it over with Palmerston. He does not think that Palmerston wrote it,
because there were in it errors, and those errors to Palmerston's
disadvantage; but it was written by Easthope under the impression that
it conveyed Palmerston's notions and opinions. Your Majesty knows very
well that Palmerston has long had much communication with the _Morning
Chronicle_ and much influence over it, and has made great use of it
for the purpose of maintaining and defending his own policy. In this
sort of matter there is much to be said upon both sides. A Minister
has a great advantage in stating his own views to the public, and if
Palmerston in the Syrian affair had not had as devoted an assistant
as the _Morning Chronicle_, he would hardly have been able to maintain
his course or carry through his measures. It has always been Lord
Melbourne's policy to keep himself aloof from the public press and to
hold it at arm's-length, and he considers it the best course, but
it is subject to disadvantages. You are never in that case strongly
supported by them, nor are the motives and reasons of your conduct
given to the public with that force and distinctness which they might
be.

Lord Melbourne has no doubt that your Majesty's assurance is well
founded, and that the present Government are anxious for the welfare
and prosperity and tranquillity of Spain. It cannot be otherwise.

Palmerston dislikes Aberdeen and has a low opinion of him. He thinks
him weak and timid, and likely to let down the character and influence
of the country. Your Majesty knows that Lord Melbourne does not
partake these opinions, certainly not at least to anything like the
extent to which Palmerston carries them.

Lord Melbourne is going down to Panshanger to-morrow, where he
understands that he is to meet Lord and Lady Lansdowne and Lord and
Lady Leveson.[5] Lord Melbourne will take care and say nothing about
Brighton, but is glad to hear that your Majesty is going thither.

    [Footnote 4: An Ambassador, M. de Salvandy, had been sent
    from France to Madrid. Espartero, the Regent, required the
    credentials to be presented to him and not to the young Queen.
    The French Ambassador having refused to comply, an unseemly
    dispute arose, and M. de Salvandy left Madrid.]

    [Footnote 5: The late Lord Granville and his first wife,
    only child of the Duc de Dalberg, and widow of Sir Ferdinand
    Acton.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _18th January 1842._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--Not to miss my day, I write a line to thank you for
your kind letters of the 10th and 13th, but shall write fully by the
messenger. Our Claremont trip was very enjoyable, only we missed Pussy
so much; another time we shall take her with us; the dear child was
so pleased to see us again, particularly dear Albert, whom she is _so_
fond of.... We think of going to Brighton early in February, as the
physicians think it will do the children great good, and perhaps it
may _me_; for I am very strong as to fatigue and exertion, but not
quite right otherwise; I am growing thinner, and there is a want of
tone, which the sea may correct.

Albert's great _fonction_[6] yesterday went off beautifully, and he
was so much admired in all ways; he always _fascinates_ the people
wherever he goes, by his very modest and unostentatious yet dignified
ways. He only came back at twelve last night; it was very kind of him
to come. The King of Prussia means, I believe, to cross on the 20th.
Now _addio_. Ever your most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 6: The Prince laid the foundation stone of the new
    Royal Exchange.]




[Pageheading: THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON]


_The Duke of Wellington to Queen Victoria._

LONDON, _21st January 1842._

Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents his humble duty to your
Majesty. He is much flattered by your Majesty's most gracious
desire that he should bear the Sword of State at the ceremony of the
christening of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.

He had already received from Sir Robert Peel an intimation of your
Majesty's gracious pleasure on this subject. He is in such good
health, as to be able to perform any duty upon which your Majesty may
think proper to employ him; and he will attend your Majesty's gracious
ceremony at Windsor Castle on Tuesday morning, the 25th Jan. inst.

All of which is humbly submitted to your Majesty by your Majesty's
most dutiful and devoted Subject and Servant,

WELLINGTON.




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _22nd January 1842._

The Queen cannot say _how grieved_ she is, and the Prince also, at
hearing of Lord Melbourne's serious indisposition, by his letter this
morning. How _very_ provoking if he cannot come on Tuesday. It will
be the _only_ important ceremony during the Queen's reign which Lord
Melbourne has _not_ been present at, and it grieves her _deeply_. It
was already a deep mortification not to see him in his old place, but
not to see him _at all_ is _too_ provoking. If Lord Melbourne should
soon get well we shall hope to see him later during the King's[7]
stay. The Prince is gone to Greenwich to meet the King, and I expect
them about five o'clock.

The Queen hopes to hear soon of Lord Melbourne's being better, and
expresses again her very sincere regret at his being prevented from
coming.

    [Footnote 7: Frederick Wilham IV., King of Prussia.]




[Pageheading: THE SLAVE TRADE]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

_28th January 1842._

Lord Aberdeen presents his most humble duty to your Majesty. Some time
ago, your Majesty was graciously pleased to express a desire to have
a copy of the Treaty concluded by your Majesty with the Four Great
Powers of Europe, for the more effectual suppression of the Slave
Trade.[8] Lord Aberdeen has had one prepared for your Majesty's use,
which he humbly begs to lay before your Majesty.

In obeying your Majesty's commands Lord Aberdeen thinks it his duty,
at the same time, to state to your Majesty that, with the exception of
some alterations and additions of little importance, the Treaty in
its present form had existed for a considerable time in the Foreign
Office. He found, also, that there had been a reluctance to sign it on
the part of the French Government; but as the objection was chiefly of
a personal nature, it was speedily removed. The only share, therefore,
which Lord Aberdeen can properly be said to have had in this
transaction is that of having been enabled to afford your Majesty
the great satisfaction of completing this blessed work at an earlier
period than would otherwise have been the case.

    [Footnote 8: The treaty conferred a mutual right of search.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _1st February 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has to
thank your Majesty for the letters of the 28th and the 31st ult., the
last of which he received this morning.

Lord Melbourne is very glad that your Majesty opens the Parliament
in person. Your Majesty knows Lord Melbourne's opinion, that it ought
always to be done, when it can be, without reference to Ministers,
politics, or political questions. Lord Melbourne hopes to be able to
go to the House in the evening, but he fears that it would be too much
for him if he were to attempt to attend also in the morning.

Lord Melbourne was in despair at hearing of poor Eos.[9] Favourites
often get shot; Lord Melbourne has known it happen often in his time.
That is the worst of dogs; they add another strong interest to a life
which has already of itself interest enough, and those, God knows!
sufficiently subject both to accident and decay.

Lord Melbourne is sorry to do anything that could trouble your Majesty
in the slightest degree, but he doubts not that your Majesty is
already aware of the matter, and therefore he has less scruple in
sending to your Majesty a letter[10] which he has received from the
Duke of Sussex. Upon the plea of not being well, Lord Melbourne has
put off seeing the Duke upon this subject until after Monday next,
and when he does see him, he will try to keep him quiet, which your
Majesty knows when he has got a thing of this sort into his head, is
no easy matter.

    [Footnote 9: A favourite greyhound of the Prince, accidentally
    shot by Prince Ferdinand. _See_ King Leopold's letter, 4th
    February.]

    [Footnote 10: This letter is not preserved among the Queen's
    papers.]




[Pageheading: THE KING OF PRUSSIA]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _1st February 1842._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--I have to thank you for a kind, short note of the 27th
inst., which I received on Sunday. I gave your kind message to the
King of Prussia, who was much _touché_ by it. He is a most amiable
man, so kind and well-meaning, and seems so much beloved. He is so
amusing too. He is very anxious that Belgium should become _liée_ with
Germany, and I think, dearest Uncle, that it would be for the _real_
good of Belgium if it could be so. You will have heard how perfectly
and splendidly everything went off on the 25th. Nothing could have
done better, and _little_ Albert (_what_ a pleasure that he has that
_dearest_ name!) behaved so well. The King left us yesterday morning
to go to town, where we follow him to-morrow; he was quite sad to
leave Windsor, which he admired so much. He dined with the Sutherlands
yesterday, and dines with the Duke of Wellington to-day, and the
Cambridges to-morrow. On Thursday he dines with us (he lodges in
Buckingham Palace), and on Friday takes his departure. He is really a
most agreeable visitor, though I must own that I am somewhat knocked
up by our great exertions.

Uncle Ferdinand is very well, and we are delighted with dear
Leopold;[11] he is so much improved, and is such a modest, sensible
boy.

I can't say much for poor Gusti,[12] though I love him, but he is
really too odd and inanimate. I hope Louise will see the King of
Prussia. You have heard our great misfortune about dear Eos; she is
going on well, but slowly, and still makes us rather anxious. It made
me quite ill the first day, and keeps me fidgety still, till we know
that she is quite safe. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

We were grieved to hear Papa had been so ill.

    [Footnote 11: Son of Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, and
    brother of the King of Portugal, afterwards a candidate for
    the hand of Queen Isabella of Spain. See _post_, p. 487.
      (Ch. XII, Footnote 54)]

    [Footnote 12: Prince Augustus, afterwards married to the
    Princess Clémentine, daughter of King Louis Philippe.]




[Pageheading: THE KING OF PRUSSIA]

[Pageheading: BETROTHAL OF PRINCE ERNEST]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _4th February 1842._

MY DEAR VICTORIA,--Thousand thanks for your kind letter of the 1st,
which I received yesterday.

The King of Prussia is a very delightful person;[13] he is so
clever and amiable, and, owing to his good-nature, not by any means
fatiguing. I fear you had cold weather yesterday for the opening of
Parliament. To-day we have here a tremendous fog; Heaven grant that
it may not be so heavy on the Thames! else the King's journey will be
rendered difficult.

We expect him to-morrow about eleven o'clock; he wishes to be at
Antwerp at five, which would indicate his departure from hence at
three o'clock. There can be no doubt that nothing could be better
than to link this country as much as possible to Germany. The public
feeling was and is still favourable to this, but in Germany some years
ago they were childishly ultra, and kicked us off most unnecessarily,
which renders everything of the sort now much less easy. In a
political point of view the King's journey will prove useful, as it
takes him still more out of the clutches of Russia and gives him more
_correct_ views of what is going on in the West of Europe.

I wish the King may also talk to his helter-skelter cousin in Holland;
if the man goes on in his wild intrigues, though he will get most
probably nothing by it _himself_, he may do a great deal of harm,
and may force us to incline more towards France for fear of _his_
intrigues with France.

I was extremely sorry to hear the accident which befell dear Eos, a
great friend of mine. I do not understand how your uncle managed it;
he ought rather to have shot somebody else of the family. Ernest
has then been going on fast enough; all I hear of the lady is very
satisfactory.[14] I don't yet know when he means to come here.

Now I must conclude. In haste, ever, my dear Victoria, your
affectionate Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 13: Lord Aberdeen wrote to Madame de Lieven: "I
    passed a great deal of time with the King of Prussia when he
    was in this country, and perfectly subscribe to the truth
    of the description you gave me of him before his
    arrival--intelligent, high-minded, and sincere. Like all
    Germans, he is sometimes a little in the clouds, but his
    projects are generous, and he wishes to do what is right."]

    [Footnote 14: He married the Princess Alexandrina of Baden on
    3rd May 1842.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _8th February 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I thank you _de tout mon c[oe]ur_ for your kind
letter of the 4th, which I received the day before yesterday. You
have now seen our good, kind, amiable King of Prussia, for whom I have
really the greatest affection and respect. We were quite sorry to lose
him, and he was much affected at going. He is so open and natural, and
seems really so anxious to do good whenever he can. His liberality and
generosity here has been immense. He is very much displeased with his
"helter-skelter cousin,"[15] and quite unhappy at the state of things
in that country....

Ernest's marriage is a _great, great delight_ to us; thank God! I say,
as I so ardently wished it, and Alexandrina is said to be really _so_
perfect. I have begged Ernest beforehand to pass his honeymoon with
us, and I beg you to urge him to do it; for he witnessed our first
happiness, and we must therefore witness his.

Leopold is a dear, sweet boy, really, so full of feeling, and so very
good-tempered and modest; the King was charmed with him and he with
the King. I am happy to say faithful Eos is quite convalescent; she
walks about wrapped up in flannel.

We are off for Brighton the day after to-morrow; I can't say I _like_
it at all. We were, and the boy too, all three, vaccinated from the
same child yesterday! Now adieu! Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Fanny Jocelyn is taking her first waiting, and makes a most excellent
and sedate _Dame d'Honneur_. I am sorry she is so very thin still.

    [Footnote 15: The King of Holland. _See_ King Leopold's letter
    of 4th February.]




[Pageheading: CHRISTENING OF PRINCE OF WALES]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

MARLBOROUGH HOUSE, _5th February 1842._

MY DEAR NIECE,--I thank you a thousand times for your kind letter,
just received, and am delighted with the hope of seeing you, if you
have time to spare, when you come to town next week. I hardly dare to
expect it, but it will make me very happy should you be able to fulfil
your kind intention.

I was happy to hear how well the holy ceremony went off on Tuesday,
and how splendid the whole was. The earnest attention of the King
of Prussia to the ceremony, and the manner with which he read the
responses, was universally remarked and admired. May your dear child,
our beloved Prince of Wales, follow his pious example in future, and
become as truly estimable and amiable and good as his Godfather really
is. He is indeed most charming, and so very agreeable and affable to
every one, that he must be loved and respected by all who have the
good fortune to approach him. I hope he does not over-fatigue himself,
for he does a great deal in the short time of his stay in England. He
expresses himself delighted with his reception.

I regret to find that your dear little girl is still suffering so much
from her teeth. God bless and guard her and her brother!--who by all
descriptions must be a very fine babe. The King of Prussia admires
little Victoria _very much_; he described her to me as the most lovely
child he ever saw.

I enclose the impression of my seal, according to your wish....

With my best love to dear Albert, I beg you to believe me ever,
dearest Victoria, your most attached and devoted Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

May I ask you to give my affectionate respects to the King of Prussia,
and my love to your Mamma?




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _14th February, Monday Night._ (_Half-past_ 1 A.M.)

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave to
acquaint your Majesty that Lord John Russell proposed this evening in
the House of Commons a resolution condemnatory of the principle of
the plan for the adjustment of the Corn Laws, brought forward by your
Majesty's servants.

Lord John Russell was followed in the debate by Mr Gladstone, the
Vice-President of the Board of Trade, who vindicated the plan....

Sir Robert Peel had a meeting yesterday of the friends of the
Government in the House of Commons, and he is convinced that although
many may have wished that the plan of the Government had given an
increased degree of protection to agriculture, the great body will
support the measure, and that we shall have no difficulty in resisting
any detached efforts that may be made to add to the duties on foreign
corn.




[Pageheading: PEEL AND PRINCE ALBERT]


_Sir Robert Peel to the Prince Albert._

WHITEHALL, _15th February(?) 1842._

SIR,--When I had the honour of last seeing your Royal Highness at
Windsor Castle, I stated to your Royal Highness that it would give
me great satisfaction to have the opportunity from time to time
of apprising your Royal Highness of the legislative measures in
contemplation of Her Majesty's servants, and of explaining in detail
any matters in respect to which your Royal Highness might wish for
information.

In conformity with this feeling on my part, I take the liberty of
sending to your Royal Highness two confidential Memoranda prepared for
the information of Her Majesty's servants on the important subjects
respectively of the state of Slavery in the East Indies, and of the
Poor Laws in this country.

They may probably be interesting to your Royal Highness, and if your
Royal Highness should encourage me to do so, I will, as occasion may
arise, make similar communications to your Royal Highness. I have the
honour to be, Sir, with sincere respect, your Royal Highness's most
faithful and humble servant,

ROBERT PEEL.

_P.S._--I do not think that the measure which I have brought forward
for the diminution of the duties on the import of foreign corn, will
deprive us of any portion of the support or goodwill of our friends.
Many wish that the reduction had not been carried so far, but almost
all are aware of the consequences of rejecting or obstructing the
measure.




[Pageheading: AFGHANISTAN]


_Lord Fitzgerald and Vesci to Queen Victoria._

INDIA BOARD, _1st March 1842._

Lord Fitzgerald, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, requests
permission humbly to submit to your Majesty, that the communications
received yesterday at the India House present a dark and alarming
picture of the position and danger of the British troops in
Afghanistan.[16]

Although the Governor-General's despatch announcing these melancholy
tidings also states that no strictly official intelligence had reached
him from Cabul, yet the opinion of Lord Auckland evidently is, that
the reports on which his despatch is founded are but too likely to be
true.

From them it would appear that a numerous and excited native
population had succeeded in intercepting all supplies, that the army
at Cabul laboured under severe privations, and that in consequence of
the strict investment of the cantonments by the enemy, there remained,
according to a letter from the late Sir William Macnaghten to an
officer with Sir Robert Sale's force, only three days' provision in
the camp.

Under such circumstances it can perhaps be but faintly hoped that any
degree of gallantry and devotion on the part of your Majesty's forces
can have extricated them from the difficulties by which they were
encompassed on every side.

Capitulation had been spoken of, and it may, unhappily, have become
inevitable, as the relieving column, expected from Candahar, had been
compelled by the severity of an unusual season to retrace its march.

The despatches from Calcutta being voluminous, and embracing minute
unofficial reports, Lord Fitzgerald has extracted and copied those
parts which relate to the military operations in Afghanistan, and most
humbly submits them to your Majesty.

He at the same time solicits permission to annex a _précis_ of some
of the most important of the private letters which have been forwarded
from India; and, as your Majesty was graciously pleased to peruse
with interest some passages from the first journal of Lady Sale, Lord
Fitzgerald ventures to add the further extracts, transmitted by Lord
Auckland, in which Lady Sale describes successive actions with the
enemy, and paints the state of the sufferings of the army, as late as
the 9th of December.

Nothing contained in any of these communications encourages the
hope of Sir Alexander Burnes's safety. In one letter the death of
an individual is mentioned, who is described as the assassin of that
lamented officer.

All of which is most humbly submitted to your Majesty by your
Majesty's most dutiful Subject and Servant,

FITZGERALD AND VESCI.

    [Footnote 16: _See_ Introductory Note, _ante_, pp. 254, 370.
     (Intro Note to Ch. X; Intro Note to Ch. XI)]




[Pageheading: A MARINE EXCURSION]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

PAVILION, _4th March 1842._

The Queen thanks Lord Melbourne for his kind letter, received the day
before yesterday, by which she is glad to see he is well, and Fanny
got safe to Dublin.

Our excursion was most successful and gratifying. It rained very much
all Monday evening at Portsmouth, but, nevertheless, we visited the
_St Vincent_ and the _Royal George_ yacht, and the Prince went all
over the Dockyards.

It stormed and rained all night, and rained when we set off on bord
the _Black Eagle_ (the _Firebrand_ that was) for Spithead on Tuesday
morning; it, however, got quite fine when we got there, and we went on
board the _Queen_, and a glorious sight it was; she is a magnificent
ship, so wide and roomy, and though only just commissioned, in the
best order. With marines, etc., her crew is near upon a thousand men!
We saw the men at dinner, and tasted the grog and soup, which pleased
them very much. Old Sir Edward Owen is very proud of her.

It was a great pleasure for the Queen to be at sea again, and not a
creature _thought_ even of being sick. The saluting of all those
great ships in the harbour at once, as we came out and returned, has a
splendid effect.

The Queen was also much pleased at seeing four of the crew of the
_Emerald_ again whom she knew so well _nine years_ ago! The Prince was
delighted with all he saw, as were also our Uncle and Cousins; these
last, we are sorry to say, leave us on Monday,--and we go up to Town
on Tuesday, where the Queen hopes to see Lord Melbourne soon.

The Queen sends Lord Melbourne a letter from the Queen of Portugal,
all which tends to show how _wrong_ it is to _think_ that they connive
at the restoration of the Charter....

Lady Dunmore is in waiting, and makes an excellent Lady-in-Waiting.
Lord Hardwicke the Queen likes very much, he seems so straightforward.
He took the greatest care of the Queen when on board ship.

Was not his father drowned at Spithead or Portsmouth?[17]

The Queen hopes to hear that Lord Melbourne is very well.

    [Footnote 17: "His father, Sir Joseph Yorke," Lord Melbourne
    replied, "was drowned in the Southampton River, off Netley
    Abbey, when sailing for pleasure. The boat was supposed to
    have been struck by lightning. His cousin, Lord Royston,
    was drowned in the year 1807 in the Baltic, at Cronstadt"
    [according to Burke in 1808, off Lubeck, _æt._ twenty-three],
    "which event, together with the death of two younger sons of
    Lord Hardwicke, gave the earldom ultimately to the present
    Lord."]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

PAVILION, _7th March 1842._

MY DEAR UNCLE,--As I wrote you so long a letter yesterday, I shall
only write you a few lines to-day, to thank you for your kind letter
of the 4th, received yesterday. Our dear Uncle and dear Cousins have
just left us, and we are very sorry to see them go; for the longer one
is together the more intimate one gets, and they were quite become as
belonging to us, and were so quiet and unassuming, that we shall
miss them much, particularly dear Leopold, whom poor Uncle Ferdinand
recommended to my especial care, and therefore am really very anxious
that we should settle something for his _future_. Uncle Ferdinand
likes the idea of his passing some time at Brussels, and some time
here, very much, and I hope we may be able to settle that. Uncle and
Cousins were sorry to go.

You will have heard how well our Portsmouth expedition went off; the
sea was quite smooth on Tuesday, and we had a delightful visit to
the _Queen_, which is a splendid ship. I think it is in these immense
wooden walls that our real greatness exists, and I am proud to think
that no _other_ nation _can_ equal us in _this_....

Now _addio!_ Ever your most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: THE FALL OF CABUL]

_Lord Fitzgerald and Vesci to Queen Victoria._

_10th March 1842._

Lord Fitzgerald, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave
most humbly and with deep sorrow to lay before your Majesty reports
which he has only within this hour received.

They are to be found in a despatch from the Governor and Council of
Bombay, and unhappily confirm, to an appalling degree, the disastrous
intelligence from Afghanistan. The commercial expresses, which reached
London yesterday, gave to the public some of the details of the fall
of Cabul; and Lord Fitzgerald laments that it is his painful duty most
humbly to inform your Majesty that the despatches just arrived confirm
to their full extent the particulars of Sir William Macnaghten's fate,
and of the fate of that remnant of gallant men who, on the faith of
a capitulation, had evacuated that cantonment which they had defended
with unavailing courage.

In addition to the despatch from the Council of Bombay, Lord
Fitzgerald humbly ventures to submit to your Majesty a letter
addressed to him by Mr Anderson, the Acting-Governor of that
Presidency, with further details of these melancholy events.

The despatches from the Governor-General of India come down to the
date of the 22nd of January (three days previous to the tragical death
of Sir William Macnaghten). Lord Auckland was then uninformed of the
actual state of the force in Cabul, though not unprepared for severe
reverses.




[Pageheading: THE GARTER]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _20th March 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and will
take an opportunity to-morrow of ascertaining your Majesty's pleasure
with respect to the remaining Garter which still remains undisposed
of, as your Majesty may probably think it advisable that the
Investiture of all the Knights selected for the vacant Garters should
take place at the same time.

Sir Robert Peel humbly represents to your Majesty that those Peers who
may severally be considered from their rank and station candidates
for this high distinction, have behaved very well in respect to it,
as since Sir Robert Peel has had the honour of serving your Majesty he
has never received, excepting in the cases of the Duke of Buckingham
and recently of Lord Cardigan, a direct application on the subject of
the Garter.

Of those who from their position and rank in the Peerage, and from
the Garter having been heretofore conferred on their ancestors or
relations, may be regarded as competitors, the principal appear to Sir
Robert Peel to be the following:--

  The Duke of Cleveland
  The Duke of Montrose
  The Marquis of Hertford
  The Marquis of Bute
  The Marquis of Abercorn
  The Marquis Camden
  The Marquis of Londonderry.

Sir Robert Peel names all, without meaning to imply that the
pretensions of all are very valid ones. He would humbly represent for
your Majesty's consideration, whether on account of rank, fortune and
general character and station in the country, the claims of the Duke
of Cleveland do not upon the whole predominate.[18]

His Grace is very much mortified and disappointed at Sir Robert Peel's
having humbly advised your Majesty to apply the general rule against
the son's succeeding the father immediately in the Lieutenancy of a
county to his case in reference to his county of Durham.

Sir Robert Peel thinks it better to write to your Majesty upon
this subject, as your Majesty may wish to have an opportunity of
considering it.

    [Footnote 18: The Garter was conferred on the Duke of
    Cleveland.]




[Pageheading: THE EARL OF MUNSTER]

[Pageheading: THE QUEEN AND THE INCOME TAX]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _21st March 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. A letter from
Charles Fox to Lady Holland, and which she has sent to me, informs me
of the shocking end of Munster,[19] which your Majesty will have heard
long before you receive this. Charles Fox attributes it entirely to
the vexatious and uneasy life which he led with Lady Munster, but he
was always, as your Majesty knows, an unhappy and discontented man,
and there is something in that unfortunate condition of illegitimacy
which seems to distort the mind and feelings and render them incapable
of justice or contentment.

It is not impossible that upon this event application may be made to
your Majesty for the continuance of the pension upon the Privy Purse
to his son. As Lord Melbourne advised your Majesty to continue these
pensions upon the late King's death, perhaps it may not be improper
that he should now say that it is his strong opinion that they should
not be continued further. There is no reason for it. They are not
very rich, but neither are they poor, and they have very opulent
connections and relations. It appears to me that the first opportunity
should be taken to show that it is not your Majesty's intention
to charge the Crown with the maintenance and support of all these
families, which will otherwise be the case. Lord Melbourne thinks
it not improper to mention this matter thus early, as otherwise the
[compassionate] feelings naturally raised by such an event might lead
to a different determination.

There is another matter mentioned in your Majesty's letter, relating
to money, which is of considerable importance, and that is the
determination taken by your Majesty to subject your own provision
to the proposed duty on income. When it was put to your Majesty Lord
Melbourne is disposed to think that your Majesty's determination[20]
was right, and it certainly will be very popular, which in the present
circumstances of the country and state of public feelings is a great
advantage.

At the same time it is giving up a principle of the Constitution,
which has hitherto exempted the Sovereign from all direct taxation,
and there are very great doubts entertained whether the announcement
to Parliament of the intention was not in a constitutional point of
view objectionable, inasmuch as it pronounced the opinion of the
Crown upon a tax which was still under discussion. It is also a great
pecuniary sacrifice, and, as your Majesty says, together with the loss
of the Duchy of Cornwall and other revenues, will make a great change
in your Majesty's pecuniary circumstances. These defalcations can only
be repaired by care and economy. Your Majesty has all the most right
feelings and the best judgment about money, and Lord Melbourne has
no doubt that your Majesty will so act as to avoid pecuniary
embarrassment--the only difficulty which Lord Melbourne fears for your
Majesty, and the only contingency which could involve your Majesty in
serious personal inconvenience.

Lord Melbourne thanks your Majesty much for the kindness of your
letter....

Everybody says that the marriage between Miss Stuart and Lord
Waterford[21] is likely to take place. It is said that he would do
almost anything rather than go to St. Petersburg. Lord Melbourne has
not seen Lord Waterford, but he is said to be very good-looking; we
know him to be rich and of high rank, and, after all, that sort of
character is not disliked by all ladies. Perhaps also she counts
upon the effect of her influence to soften, to tranquillise, and to
restrain.

Lord Melbourne hears a very bad account of Lord Anglesey's affairs.
His case is a hard one, for these pecuniary difficulties are owing to
the extravagance of others, and by no means to his own. Lord Melbourne
saw Uxbridge and Ellen at Lady Palmerston's on Saturday evening. The
latter seemed in good spirits, and said that she did not mean to shut
herself up too closely in Hertfordshire.

Lord Melbourne thought that your Majesty would be pleased with
Lambeth. The view from the great window in the drawing-room over the
river, and to the Houses of Parliament and the Abbey, is very fine
indeed, but like all London views can rarely be seen in consequence of
the foggy atmosphere....

No doubt your Majesty and His Royal Highness must be anxious for a
little quiet and repose, which Lord Melbourne hopes that your Majesty
will enjoy. Lord Melbourne had feared that your Majesty's health was
not quite so good as it appeared.... Lord Melbourne concludes this
very long letter with the most fervent expression of his most sincere
wishes for your Majesty's health and happiness.

Lord Melbourne in speaking of poor Lord Munster forgot to mention that
at the Levée on Wednesday last he followed Lord Melbourne down the
long gallery as he was going away, came up to him with great emotion
of manner, pressed his hand warmly, and said that he wished to take
the earliest opportunity of thanking Lord Melbourne for all the
kindness he had shown him whilst he had been in office.

    [Footnote 19: The Earl of Munster, son of William IV. and Mrs.
    Jordan, shot himself, 20th March. His wife was a daughter of
    the Earl of Egremont.]

    [Footnote 20: The Queen had decided that she would herself pay
    Income Tax.]

    [Footnote 21: Henry, third Marquis, and Louisa, second
    daughter of Lord Stuart de Rothesay, were married on 8th
    June.]




[Pageheading: STRAWBERRY HILL]

[Pageheading: THE ROYAL GOVERNESS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

PANSHANGER, _31st March 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is much
rejoiced to learn that your Majesty has had fine weather and has
enjoyed it. It rained here hard yesterday in the morning, but cleared
up about half-past twelve and was very fine indeed. Lord Melbourne
went over to Brocket Hall and enjoyed it much. He does not intend
to return to London until Monday next, when the House of Lords
reassembles. It is to be hoped that we shall then soon have the Corn
Bill up from the Commons and pass it. The Income Tax will give some
trouble, but that done, and the Poor Law Bill, the end of the Session
may begin to be looked forward to.

The sale of Strawberry Hill[22] naturally excites interest, and things
are not unlikely to be sold high. The collection has after all
been kept together, and the place has remained in the family of his
niece,[23] the Duchess of Gloucester, to whom he bequeathed it, longer
than he himself expected. He says in one of his letters that he would
send a statue down to Linton, Sir Horace Mann's place in Kent, because
there it had a better chance of remaining permanently, "for as to this
poor bauble of a place," he adds, "it will be knocked to pieces in a
very few years after my decease." It has stood, however, and remained
five-and-forty years, a longer period than he had anticipated. Some
of the works, such as the bell by Benvenuto Cellini, and the antique
Eagle, are very fine; others are only curious. Lord Melbourne would
not give much money for a mere curiosity, unless there were also some
intrinsic merits or beauty.

What is the value of Cardinal Wolsey's cap, for instance? It was not
different from that of any other Cardinal, and a Cardinal's cap is no
great wonder.

Lord Melbourne returns Lord Munster's letter. It is without date, but
was evidently written in contemplation of the dreadful act which he
afterwards perpetrated. It is very melancholy. Lord Melbourne
was certain that your Majesty would send to Lord Adolphus[24] the
assurance which you have done, and that you would be anxious to assist
his children, and promote their interests by every means in your
power. But both their brothers and they must be made sensible that
they must make some effort for themselves.

Lord Melbourne is very glad to learn that your Majesty intends to
offer the Round Tower[25] to the Duke of Sussex. It is in every
respect kind. It will be of essential service to him, and it will
gratify him most exceedingly.

Lord Melbourne thinks that your Majesty's decision respecting the
Governess[26] is right. It should be a lady of rank; but that she
should be a woman of sense and discretion, and capable of fulfilling
the duties of the office, is of more importance than whether she is a
Duchess, a Marchioness, or a Countess. The selection is difficult, but
if your Majesty can find a person, it would not be well to consider
either high or low rank as a disqualification.

Lord Melbourne intends to take advantage of his freedom from the
restraints of office in order to see a little of the bloom of spring
and summer, which he has missed for so many years. He has got one or
two horses, which he likes well enough, and has begun to ride again a
little. Lord Melbourne wishes your Majesty much of the same enjoyment,
together with all health, happiness, and prosperity.

    [Footnote 22: Near Twickenham, formerly the residence of
    Horace Walpole, and filled with his collection of pictures and
    _objets de vertu_.]

    [Footnote 23: The Duke of Gloucester, brother of George
    III., married in 1766 Maria, Countess-Dowager Waldegrave,
    illegitimate daughter of Sir Edward Walpole, and niece of
    Horace Walpole. This, and the Duke of Cumberland's marriage in
    1771 to Lady Anne Horton, occasioned the passing of the Royal
    Marriages Act.]

    [Footnote 24: Lord Adolphus FitzClarence (1802-1856), a
    Rear-Admiral, brother of the Earl of Munster.]

    [Footnote 25: The Earl of Munster had held the office of
    Governor and Constable of Windsor Castle, with a salary of
    £1,000 a year.]

    [Footnote 26: To the Royal children. Lady Lyttelton was
    ultimately appointed.]




[Pageheading: PARTY POLITICS]

[Pageheading: THE GARTER]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _6th April 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has this
morning received your Majesty's very kind and confidential letter, for
which he greatly thanks your Majesty. Your Majesty may depend upon it
that Lord Melbourne will do everything in his power to discourage and
restrain factious and vexatious opposition, not only on account of
your Majesty's wish, but because he disapproves it as much as your
Majesty can possibly do. But everything in his power he fears is but
little. The leaders of a party, or those who are so called, have but
little sway over their followers, particularly when not in Government,
and when they have it not in their power to threaten them with
any very serious consequences, such as the dissolution of the
Administration. Mr Pulteney, afterwards Earl of Bath, is reported to
have said that political parties were like snakes, guided not by their
heads, but by their tails. Lord Melbourne does not know whether this
is true of the snake, but it is certainly so of the party. The conduct
of the Opposition upon the resolution respecting the Income Tax is
rendered peculiarly ridiculous by the result. They forcibly put it off
until after the holidays, and then upon the first day of the meeting
they vote it without a division. What is this but admitting that they
looked to a movement in the country which they have not been able to
create? Moreover, all Oppositions that Lord Melbourne has ever seen
are more or less factious. The Opposition of Mr Fox to Mr Pitt was the
least so, but these were great men, greater than any that exist at
the present day, although Lord Melbourne is by no means inclined to
depreciate his own times. The factiousness of one Opposition naturally
produces the same in the next. They say, "They did so to us; why
should we not do so to them?" Your Majesty may rest assured that
Lord Melbourne will do everything he can to prevent delay, and to
accelerate the transaction of the public business.

Lord Melbourne sends a letter which he has received this morning from
the Duke of Sussex, and which expresses very right and proper feeling.
Lord Melbourne has written in reply that, "Your Majesty was no doubt
influenced principally by your natural affection for him, and by your
sense of the generosity of his conduct towards Lord Munster, but that
if any thought of Lord Melbourne intervened, your Majesty could not
have given a higher or a more acceptable proof of your approbation and
regard."

The Garters[27] seem to Lord Melbourne to be given well enough. Your
Majesty's feelings upon the subject are most kind and amiable. But
these things cannot be helped, and it is upon the whole advantageous
that each party should have their portion of patronage and honours.
If there is very distinguished service, the Garter should be bestowed
upon it. Otherwise, in Lord Melbourne's opinion, it is better given
to noblemen of high rank and great property. The chapter in
Ecclesiasticus, read in St George's Chapel on Obiit Sunday, well
describes those who ought to have it, with the exception of those "who
find out musical tunes." Lord Melbourne does not think it well given
to Ministers. It is always then subject to the imputation of their
giving it to themselves, and pronouncing an approbation of their own
conduct.

Lord Melbourne hopes that the Pope's standing sponsor for the young
Prince of Portugal is a sign of complete reconciliation with the See
of Rome. It is a very awkward thing for a Roman Catholic Government to
be at variance with the Pope. He is still a very ugly customer.

Lord Melbourne is very much concerned to hear of the Baron's[28]
illness--very much indeed; he is an excellent and most valuable man,
with one of the soundest and coolest judgments that Lord Melbourne has
ever met with. Your Majesty knows that Lord Melbourne has never had
a favourable opinion of his health. There seems to be about him a
settled weakness of the stomach, which is in fact the seat of health,
strength, thought and life. Lord Melbourne sees that a great physician
says that Napoleon lost the battle of Leipsic in consequence of some
very greasy soup which he ate the day before, and which clouded his
judgment and obscured his perceptions.

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear that your Majesty has amused
yourself so well in the country, and is not surprised that you are
unwilling to quit it. He means himself to see a little of the coming
in of the spring, which he has not done for many years.

    [Footnote 27: The recipients had been the King of Saxony,
    the Duke of Beaufort, the Duke of Buckingham, the Marquess of
    Salisbury, the Duke of Cleveland.]

    [Footnote 28: Baron Stockmar.]




[Pageheading: A BRILLIANT BALL]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _19th April 1842._

DEAREST UNCLE,--I am so sorry to see by your kind letter of the
15th that you are all so _enrhumés_, but hear to-day from Vecto that
Charlotte is quite well again. I am quite bewildered with all the
arrangements for our _bal costumé_, which I wish you could see; we are
to be Edward III. and Queen Philippa, and a great number of our Court
to be dressed like the people in those times, and very correctly, so
as to make a grand _Aufzug_; but there is such asking, and so many
silks and drawings and crowns, and God knows what, to look at, that I,
who hate being troubled about dress, am quite _confuse_.

To get a little rest we mean to run down to Claremont with the
children from Friday to Monday. My last ball was very splendid, and I
have a concert on Monday next....

I hope Ernest and dear Alexandrine will come in June, and stay some
time _quietly_ with us in the country. I saw another beautiful letter
of hers, so well and sensibly and religiously written, it would have
pleased you. Now adieu! Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _20th April 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
your Majesty much for your letter of the 17th inst. Lord Melbourne has
been so much occupied with the debates in the House of Lords during
the last two days, that he has ventured to put off replying to your
Majesty's letters, which he trusts that your Majesty will excuse.

Lord Melbourne did not leave the ball until ten minutes after one, and
as there were so many persons there, which Lord Melbourne thinks quite
right and was very glad to see, Lord Melbourne had little hope of
seeing your Majesty again, and therefore ventured to take advantage of
having ordered his carriage at half-past twelve and of its having
come at the time that it was ordered. It was a very brilliant and very
beautiful and a very gay ball.

Lord Melbourne is very sorry to be obliged to express his fear that
your Majesty will prove more in the right than he was about the
duration of Parliament. There will be much debate in the Committee
upon the details of the Income Tax, and the discussions upon the
Tariff of duties, which affects so many interests, are likely to be
very long indeed. There is one good thing in the House of Lords, and
that is that it never much delays or obstructs public business....

As Lord Melbourne drove down the Park on Saturday evening last to dine
with his sister, he could see clearly into your Majesty's room, so
as to be able to distinguish the pictures, tables, etc., the candles
being lighted and the curtains not drawn. Your Majesty was just
setting off for the Opera.




[Pageheading: PRINCE ALBERT AND THE ARMY]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _20th April 1842._

The Queen encloses the Prince's letter to Sir Robert Peel, containing
his acceptance of the Guards. At the same time, both the Prince and
Queen feel much regret at the Prince's leaving the 11th, which is,
if possible, enhanced by seeing the Regiment out to-day, which is
in beautiful order. It was, besides, the Regiment which escorted the
Prince from Dover to Canterbury on his arrival in England in February
'40. The Queen fears, indeed knows, that Lord Cardigan will be deeply
mortified at the Prince's leaving the Regiment, and that it will have
the effect of appearing like another slight to him; therefore, the
Queen much wishes that at some fit opportunity[29] a mark of favour
should be bestowed upon him....

The Queen hopes Sir Robert will think of this.

    [Footnote 29: Lord Cardigan was promoted Major-General in
    1847. He became Inspector-General of Cavalry, and received the
    K.C.B. in 1855.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _26th April 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and
acknowledges with many thanks your Majesty's letter of the 24th inst.,
which he received yesterday morning. Lord Melbourne learns with the
greatest satisfaction that Lady Lyttelton has undertaken the important
and interesting charge, for which she is so well fitted. Lord
Melbourne is most sincerely of opinion that no other person so well
qualified could have been selected. Lord Melbourne will keep the
matter strictly secret; he has not yet mentioned it to any one, nor
has he heard it mentioned by any other person, which, as it must be
known to some, rather surprises him. Unreserved approbation cannot
be expected for anything, but when it is known, Lord Melbourne
anticipates that it will meet with as general an assent as could be
anticipated for a choice in which all the community will take, and
indeed have, so deep an interest.




[Pageheading: GOETHE AND SCHILLER]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _15th May 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is
very sorry indeed, and entreats your Majesty's pardon for his great
omission on Monday evening. He was never told that he was to pass
before your Majesty at the beginning; at the same time he admits
that it was a blundering piece of stupidity not to find this out of
himself. After this he never saw the glimmer of a chance of being able
to get near to your Majesty.

Lord Melbourne wonders much who could have whispered to your Majesty
that he felt or expressed anything but the most unqualified admiration
of the ball, which was the most magnificent and beautiful spectacle
that he ever beheld. Lord Melbourne also believes it to be very
popular, for the reasons which your Majesty mentions.

Your Majesty having generally chosen handsome and attractive girls for
the Maids of Honour, which is very right, must expect to lose them in
this way. Lord Melbourne is very glad of the marriage. Lord Emlyn[30]
always seemed to him a very pleasing young man, and well calculated to
make a woman happy.

Lord Melbourne felt quite sure that there had been a mistake about Ben
Stanley, which was the reason that he mentioned his name. He is sorry
that he has made a fool of himself by writing. Having had so much to
do with invitations during the two last years, he was not altogether
unnaturally mortified to find himself not invited there.[31] Stanley
is not a man to whom Lord Melbourne is very partial, but we must give
every one his due. Lord Melbourne always discourages to the utmost of
his power the notion of any one's having a right or claim to be asked,
which notion, however, has a strong possession of the minds of people
in general.

Lord Melbourne is come down here again, being determined to see this
spring thoroughly and completely. His feelings are like those, so
beautifully described by Schiller, of Max Piccolomini,[32] when, after
a youth passed entirely in war, he for the first time sees a country
which has enjoyed the blessings of peace. The Germans seem to Lord
Melbourne generally to prefer Goethe to Schiller, a decision which
surprises him, although he feels that he has no right to dictate to
a people, of whose language he does not understand a word, their
judgment upon their own authors. But the one, Schiller, seems to him
to be all truth, clearness, nature and beauty; the other, principally
mysticism, obscurity, and unintelligibility.

Lord Melbourne intends to return on Wednesday, and will have the
honour and pleasure of waiting upon your Majesty on Thursday.

    [Footnote 30: The second Earl Cawdor, who married Miss Sarah
    Mary Cavendish.]

    [Footnote 31: Edward John, afterwards second Lord Stanley of
    Alderley, was nicknamed Ben, after "Sir Benjamin Backbite."
    He had mentioned to Lord Melbourne that he was disappointed at
    not receiving an invitation to the Royal Ball.]

    [Footnote 32: In the Wallenstein Trilogy.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _20th May 1842._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I found here yesterday a very long and dear
letter from your august hand, which made me very happy. Your _fête_
I believe to have been most probably one of the most splendid _ever_
given. There is hardly a country where so much magnificence exists;
Austria has some of the means, but the Court is not elegant from its
nature. We regret sincerely not to have been able to witness it, and
will admire the exhibition of your splendid costume.




[Pageheading: MR EDWIN LANDSEER]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _27th May 1842._

... Sir Robert Peel humbly submits his opinion to your Majesty that
Mr Landseer's eminence as an artist would fully justify his having
the honour of Knighthood, and would not give any legitimate ground of
complaint to any other artist on account of a similar distinction not
being conferred on him.

Sir Robert Peel proposes therefore to write to Mr Landseer on the
subject, as your Majesty's opinion appears to be in favour of his name
appearing with the others, should he wish for the distinction....




_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _28th May 1842._

The Queen is quite vexed at having been quite unable to write to Lord
Melbourne sooner, but we have been so occupied that she could not. She
was so vexed too to have not had her head turned the other way when
she met him yesterday, but she was looking at the Prince, her Uncle,
and Cousins riding, and only turned to see Lord Melbourne's groom whom
she instantly recognised, but too late, alas! The Queen spent a
very merry, happy birthday at dear old Claremont, and we finished by
dancing in the gallery. She was grieved Lord Melbourne could not be
there.

We have got our dear Uncle Mensdorff[33] and his four sons here, which
is a great happiness to us. Dear Uncle (who Lord Melbourne is aware is
a _most_ distinguished officer) is a delightful and amiable old man,
and the sons are all so nice and amiable and kind and good; Lord
Melbourne remembers seeing Alexander here in 1839, and that the
Queen was very partial to him. The two eldest and the youngest--Hugo,
Alphonse, and Arthur--are all amiable, though none near so
good-looking, but so very well brought up and so unassuming. The
second is very clever. And it is quite beautiful to see the love the
father has for his sons, and _vice versâ_--and the affection the four
brothers have for one another; this is so rarely seen that it does
one's heart good to witness it. The Queen has appointed the Duchess of
Norfolk in Lady Lyttelton's place, and intends appointing Lady Canning
in Lady Dalhousie's, who has resigned from ill-health.

Lady Lyttelton _is_ established here in her new office, and does
everything admirably.

The Queen must conclude here as she has got so much to do--hoping Lord
Melbourne is well.

    [Footnote 33: _See_ p. 97.]




[Pageheading: LANDSEER DECLINES KNIGHTHOOD]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _31st May 1842._

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave to
acquaint your Majesty, that he has just seen Mr Landseer.

Mr Landseer repeated his expressions of deep and sincere gratitude for
the favour and kindness with which your Majesty had contemplated
his claims for professional distinction, but appeared to retain the
impression that he had yet scarcely done enough to entitle him to the
honour which it was contemplated to bestow upon him.

In the course of conversation he observed that he was now occupied
upon works of a more important character than any that he had yet
completed, and mentioned particularly an equestrian portrait of your
Majesty. He said that when these works were finished, and should they
prove successful and meet with your Majesty's approbation, he might
feel himself better entitled to receive a mark of your Majesty's
favour.

As these were evidently his sincere impressions and wishes, Sir Robert
Peel forbore from pressing upon him the immediate acceptance of the
honour of Knighthood.




[Pageheading: ATTEMPT ON THE QUEEN]

[Pageheading: JOHN FRANCIS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _31st May 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE.--I wish to be the first to inform you of what
happened yesterday evening, and to tell you that we are _saines et
sauves_. On returning from the chapel on Sunday, Albert was observing
how civil the people were, and then suddenly turned to me and said it
appeared to him as though a man had held out a pistol to the carriage,
and that it had hung fire; accordingly, when we came home he mentioned
it to Colonel Arbuthnot, who was only to tell it to Sir J. Graham and
Sir Robert Peel, and have the police instructed, and _nobody else_.
No one, however, who was with us, such as footmen, etc., had seen
anything at all. Albert began to doubt what he believed he had seen.
Well, yesterday morning (Monday) a lad came to Murray[34] (who of
course knew nothing) and said that he saw a man in the crowd as
we came home from church, present a pistol to the carriage, which,
however, did not go off, and heard the man say, "Fool that I was not
to fire!" The man then vanished, and this boy followed another man
(an old man) up St James's Street who repeated twice, "How very
extraordinary!" but instead of saying anything to the police, asked
the boy for his direction and disappeared. The boy accordingly was
sent to Sir Robert Peel, and (doubtful as it all still was) every
precaution was taken, still keeping the thing completely secret, not
a soul in the house knowing a word, and accordingly after some
consultation, as _nothing_ could be done, we drove out--many police
then in plain clothes being distributed in and about the parks, and
the two Equerries riding so close on each side that they must have
been hit, if anybody had; still the feeling of looking out for such a
man was not _des plus agréables_; however, we drove through the parks,
up to Hampstead, and back again. All was so quiet that we almost
thought of nothing,--when, as we drove down Constitution Hill, very
fast, we heard the report of a pistol, but not at all loud, so that
had we not been on the alert we should hardly have taken notice of
it. We saw the man seized by a policeman _next to whom he was standing
when he_ fired, but we did not stop. Colonel Arbuthnot and two others
saw him take aim, but we only _heard_ the report (looking both the
other way). We felt both very glad that our drive had had the effect
of having the man seized. Whether it was loaded or not we cannot yet
tell, but we are again full of gratitude to Providence for invariably
_protecting_ us! The feeling of horror is very great in the public,
and great affection is shown us. The man was yesterday examined at the
Home Office, is called John Francis, is a cabinet-maker, and son of a
machine-maker of Covent Garden Theatre, is good-looking (they say). I
have never seen him at all close, but Arbuthnot gave the description
of him from what he saw on Sunday, which exactly answered. Only twenty
or twenty-one years old, and _not_ the _least_ mad--but very cunning.
The boy identified him this morning, amongst many others. Everything
is to be kept secret _this_ time, which is very right, and altogether
I think it is being well done. Every further particular you shall
hear. I was really not at all frightened, and feel _very_ proud at
dear Uncle Mensdorff calling me "_sehr muthig_," which I shall ever
remember with peculiar pride, coming from so distinguished an officer
as he is! Thank God, my Angel is also well! but he says that had
the man fired on Sunday, he must have been hit in the head! God is
merciful; that indeed we must feel daily more! Uncle and cousins were
quite horrified.... Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

You will tell Louise _all_, of course.

    [Footnote 34: The Hon. Charles Augustus Murray, Master of the
    Household, afterwards Consul-General of Egypt, and Minister in
    Persia and at Dresden.]




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

BUSHEY HOUSE (_Monday night_), _May 1842._

MY DEAR NIECE,--I must write a line to express to you what I felt
when I took up the newspapers which informed me of what had happened
yesterday. Is it possible?--can it be true? was my first question.
However, the detailed accounts leave no doubt that a pistol was
pointed at you again, though not fired. It is really shocking that
such wretches exist who dare tempt (_sic_) to alarm you--though in
this instance there was nothing alarming except the evil spirit which
inspired the boy.

How grateful must we not feel to our merciful God, who protects you so
visibly, and gives you courage and confidence in Him, who is and ever
will be your safest guard and support. Trust in Him and you will not
fail to be well guided.

I hope it is true that you were not aware of what had happened when
you went to church, not to be disturbed in your devotions, and that
the account did not agitate you.

Edward[35] came yesterday from town, but he knew nothing but that a
pistol had been taken from a man in the Park. We hardly believed
the story till the papers informed us of the truth. Pray say to dear
Albert what I feel _for_ and _with you both_, and how I thank God and
pray that His merciful protection may never fail you.

We are going to Frogmore to-morrow, and from there shall drive in the
Park and to St George's Chapel. I hope the weather will be as fine
as it was to-day. God bless and guard you ever and ever! dearest
Victoria, prays your most devotedly attached Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 35: Prince Edward of Saxe-Weimar.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _1st June 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He was much
shocked at learning, which he did not do until six o'clock yesterday
evening, the event which took place on Monday. After what took place
on Sunday, it must have been a trial to your Majesty's nerves, and
still more to those of the Prince, to go out on Monday; but it appears
to Lord Melbourne that your Majesty judged quite correctly in doing
so. Lord Melbourne hardly knows what to say of this repeated attempt.
It is a depravity and a malice as unintelligible as it is atrocious.
Lord Melbourne is at least as grateful as any one of your Majesty's
subjects, and the gratitude is universal and fervent for your
Majesty's safety.

Lord Melbourne had ridden over in the morning to visit Lord and Lady
Uxbridge in their rural retirement, and upon his return to Brocket
Hall, about six o'clock, found the morning newspaper with the accounts
of what had happened. If they had sent him down a messenger on Monday
night, which it would have been better to have done, he would have
been yesterday in his place in the House of Lords.

Lord Melbourne found Uxbridge enveloped in parcels and boxes, which
he was busy unpacking, Lady Uxbridge reclining by the stream under the
shade of a plane-tree, and the two young ladies somewhat pensive. The
place looked beautiful, but Lord Melbourne fears that all its beauty
will not be a compensation to them for London at this time of the
year.




[Pageheading: THE ADDRESS]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _1st June 1842._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty to your Majesty, submits a copy
of the Answer to the Address; and an alteration has been made in the
Answer which Sir James Graham hopes may render it conformable to the
tender and generous feelings which your Majesty has deigned to express
with reference to the Prince.

The two Houses of Parliament followed the exact precedent which
has been established in Oxford's case; and although the life of the
Prince, so dear to your Majesty, is highly valued by all your loving
subjects, yet the crime of treason attaches only to an attack on the
sacred person of your Majesty; and the expressions used by Parliament
with reference to these atrocious crimes, when directed against the
Sovereign, are necessarily inapplicable to any other person, and could
not be used with propriety. Hence the omission in the former case
of all allusion to the Prince; and the silence of Parliament on the
present occasion is to be ascribed to the same cause--not to any cold
indifference, which the general feeling of attachment to the Prince
entirely forbids.

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's dutiful Subject and
Servant,

J. R. G. GRAHAM.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _6th June 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I was sure of the kind interest you would take in
the event of the 29th and 30th. I am most thankful for your very kind,
long letter of the 3rd, which I received the day before yesterday. I
have so little time--as we are just setting off for Ascot--that I
can hardly write anything to you. There seems no doubt whatever that
Francis is totally without accomplices, and a _mauvais sujet_. We
shall be able probably to tell you more when we see you. I am grieved
that you have deferred your visit again. We are then to expect your
arrival either on the Tuesday or Wednesday? Very thankful we should be
soon to hear whom you bring with you.

Dear Uncle and the Cousins are delighted with Windsor, and the weather
is beautiful, only unfortunately _too_ hot to be pleasant. I rode on
my little Barb at a review of Cavalry at Wormwood Scrubbs on Saturday,
_dont je suis bien fière_. Now adieu! dearest Uncle. In haste, your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: NEWS FROM AFGHANISTAN]

[Pageheading: SALE AND POLLOCK]


_Lord Fitzgerald and Vesci to Queen Victoria._

INDIA BOARD, _7th June 1842._

Lord Fitzgerald, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, humbly
acquaints your Majesty that despatches have been this day received
from the Governor-General and the several Presidencies of India.

They announce a signal victory, achieved by Sir Robert Sale and his
admirable garrison.[36]

The circumstances attending his glorious success, and the consequences
likely to result from it, are amongst the most important of this
hurtful war.

They are described in Sir Robert Sale's Report, as published in the
_Bombay Gazette_, a copy of which is most humbly submitted to your
Majesty.

The despatches further bring the gratifying intelligence that General
Pollock had forced the Khyber Pass, and, defeating the enemy on
every point, had surmounted the chief obstacles of that dangerous
defile.[37]

The relief of the brave men under Sir Robert Sale, to which their own
gallantry and their late victory have so mainly contributed, may now
be regarded as certain from the success of General Pollock's advance.

It is with regret that Lord Fitzgerald has to add that the citadel
of Ghuznee has surrendered on the faith of a capitulation, perhaps
already violated, and that General England, who had marched with a
convoy of treasure, and other supplies for the Army at Candahar, had
been forced to retrace his steps and had arrived at Quetta.

At the same time, however, General Nott had dispersed considerable
assemblages of rebel tribes, whom he had defeated with loss, while
an attack made during his absence on the city of Candahar had been
effectually repulsed by that portion of his force which had been left
for its defence.

The Governor-General having proceeded in person to the North-Western
Provinces of Bengal, had issued at Benares General Orders
congratulating the Army on the return of victory to its ranks, and on
the fresh lustre thus added to your Majesty's Arms.

FITZGERALD AND VESCI.


    [Footnote 36: Sir R. Sale, who with his column had thrown
    himself into Jellalabad on 13th November 1841, and had heard
    Brydon's narrative, made a _sortie_ on 7th April, and secured
    a great victory over Akbar Khan, whose force outnumbered
    Sale's by five to one.]

    [Footnote 37: General Pollock, whom Auckland had selected
    for the command, and who found everything in confusion on the
    frontier, swept the Khyber Pass of the enemy, and joined
    Sale. The insurrection had spread to Candahar, where General
    (afterwards Sir William) Nott was in command with a force of
    10,000 men. He heard of Macnaghten's murder on 31st January,
    and, like Sale, refused to follow the order received (under
    coercion, as he believed) from Elphinstone to return to India.
    On the contrary, he ordered all Afghans to leave Candahar,
    marched out himself and attacked and dispersed the enemy,
    12,000 strong; while a flank movement made by the enemy on
    the city was repulsed with great loss. General (afterwards Sir
    Richard) England started from Quetta with reinforcements, but
    met with a reverse at Haikalzai; meanwhile also Colonel
    Palmer had had to make terms at Ghuznee, and had to encounter
    treachery. Nott, who was badly in want of money and ammunition
    for the troops, sent imperative orders to General England to
    reinforce him, which he did early in May.]




[Pageheading: DEBATE ON THE INCOME TAX]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _10th June 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has
thought it better not to interrupt your Majesty with letters during
the bustle of the last week, but he cannot omit to express to your
Majesty how much he was struck with the letter of the 2nd inst. which
he received, and how entirely he concurs in the justice and propriety
of your Majesty's feelings and observations. Let us hope that we shall
have no more of these horrid attempts, which are generated by the
wild notions of the time, and by the expectation, extravagant and
unfounded, so industriously inculcated into the public mind, of
advantages to be derived from change and confusion; Lord Melbourne
anxiously hopes that the painful impressions which such events
are calculated to produce upon your Majesty's mind, and which they
necessarily must produce, will pass away and that nothing will happen
to renew and revive them.

Lord Melbourne is happy to hear from Normanby that everything passed
off well and successfully at Windsor and at Ascot. The last is always
rather a doubtful and disagreeable ordeal to pass through.

We should have got through the debate upon the Income Tax this evening
in the House of Lords, if Lansdowne had not unfortunately this morning
had an access of gout in the hand, which prevented him from attending,
and obliged the debate to be deferred. Lord Melbourne hopes that the
resolution which Lansdowne is to move[38] is put in such a shape as to
vindicate our course, and at the same time not to condemn that which
has been adopted overmuch, nor to pledge us for the future....

Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes that your Majesty is well and not too
much affected by the heat of this weather, which does not suit Lord
Melbourne very well. In conjunction with a large dinner which we had
at the Reform Club in honour of the Duke of Sussex, it has given Lord
Melbourne a good deal of headache and indisposition. The Duke was in
very good humour, and much pleased with the dinner, but he was by no
means well or strong.

    [Footnote 38: This Resolution was in favour of altering the
    Corn, Sugar, and Timber Duties, in preference to imposing an
    Income Tax. It was negatived by 112 to 52.]




[Pageheading: QUEEN'S FIRST RAILWAY JOURNEY]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _14th June 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Though I shall have the inexpressible happiness
of seeing you and dearest Louise so soon, I write these few lines
to thank you for your very kind letter of the 9th. We arrived here
yesterday morning, having come by the railroad, from Windsor, in half
an hour, free from dust and crowd and heat, and I am quite charmed
with it.[39] We spent a delightful time at Windsor, which would have
been still pleasanter had not the heat been such, ever since Saturday
week, that one is quite overcome; the grass is quite brown, and the
earth full of wide cracks; there has not been a drop of rain since the
24th, my birthday! We rode and walked and danced, and I think I never
was better than in all this fatigue and exercise....

I get every day fonder of dearest, excellent Uncle Mensdorff and the
dear cousins, who are so amiable and good and unassuming; really, in
society they keep quite in the background. They are out and out the
nicest cousins we have. I am sure what I can do for them I shall be
too happy to do. Alexander is the most distinguished and solid,
but Alphonse and Arthur the most unassuming. There is something so
peculiarly _good_ in dear Arthur! and they are all five so fond of
Pussy, and she so fond of them.... Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.


    [Footnote 39: This was the Queen's first journey on the Great
    Western Railway. The Prince had often used it, and had been
    known to say, on descending from the train, "Not quite so
    fast next time, Mr Conductor, if you please."--Acworth, _The
    Railways of England_, p. 17.]




[Pageheading: THE INCOME TAX BILL]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _19th June 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and offers
many thanks for the letter, which he received yesterday evening. Lord
Melbourne is very glad to hear that your Majesty has enjoyed in the
society of your near and dear relations so much happiness, which, like
all other things, must have its portion of alloy in their departure.
Lord Melbourne was much pleased with the short conversation which
he had with Count Mensdorff at Stafford House, and it is highly
interesting to see at this distance of time a man who has been engaged
in affairs so important and of so awful and melancholy a character.
Your Majesty is surely right in terming your cousins young men; if
the health and constitution be good, thirty-six is a young man,
twenty-nine and thirty-two very young men, and twenty-five quite a
boy. The weather has been very hot but very fine. The rain was so much
required that Lord Melbourne cannot lament its coming, but he also
regrets the hot suns which it has banished.

The course which had been taken upon the Income Tax in the House of
Commons,[40] contrary to Lord Melbourne's wish and opinion, rendered
it impossible for Lord Melbourne directly to support the Bill in the
House of Lords without offending and separating himself from the whole
body of those who supported the last Government.

He therefore acquiesced in the resolution, which was moved by Lord
Lansdowne, and which did not oppose the measure, but declared that it
might have been avoided if the course which we had proposed had been
taken. In the debate Lord Melbourne argued as strongly as he could in
favour of the tax, and ended by declaring that if it was imposed, he
could not pledge himself for the future against maintaining and even
extending it. Lord Melbourne is anxious to make this explanation of
his conduct to your Majesty, and hopes therefore that your Majesty
will forgive his writing thus much upon this subject. Lord Melbourne
very much lamented that the business did not terminate as amiably as
it began, and that a contest should have been got into respecting the
third reading of the Bill; but considering that the measure had passed
by accident through its first stages without any debate, and that
there were Lords who were still desirous of speaking upon it, it was
imprudent of the Ministers not at once to give another day for that
purpose, especially as they were sure to be compelled to do so by
repeated motions of adjournment.

The feelings which your Majesty expresses upon the conviction of this
man[41] are natural, and such as must arise in your Majesty's bosom;
but Lord Melbourne knows very well that your Majesty will at once see
the necessity of not yielding to your own feelings, and of leaving the
issue entirely in the hands of your advisers.

Without any reference to personal or particular circumstances, without
adverting to your Majesty's age, sex, qualities mental or personal,
without attending to any sentiments of attachment or affection which
may be felt for your Majesty's person, it must be remembered that your
Majesty's life is, from the position which you occupy and the office
which you fill, the most important life in these realms; it is also
too clear that it is the most exposed life in the country, the life
the most obnoxious[42] to danger; and therefore it is a duty to throw
around it every protection which the law and the execution of the law
can afford.

Lord Melbourne was sure that your Majesty, being fond of speed, would
be delighted with the railway. Lord Melbourne hopes that your Majesty
was not much affected by the heat, which he feared that you would be.

Has your Majesty read the last volume of Madame D'Arblay's (Miss
Burney) Diary, which contains the account of her service in the family
of George III.?[43] It is a curious [work], gives a curious account of
the _intérieur_, and shows the King and Queen and the Princesses in a
very amiable light.

    [Footnote 40: Lord John Russell had strenuously opposed the
    Income Tax Bill, but had been defeated by large majorities.]

    [Footnote 41: Frances was tried on 17th June, and convicted.
    The death sentence was commuted to one of transportation for
    life.]

    [Footnote 42: Used in the classical sense of "exposed to";
    _cf._ "obnoxia fato."]

    [Footnote 43: The first five volumes were published this
    year, Madame D'Arblay having died in 1840, at the age of
    eighty-seven. Croker somewhat rancorously attacked them in the
    _Quarterly_, to which Macaulay replied in the _Edinburgh_.]




[Pageheading: A PRESENT FROM MUSCAT]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _28th June 1842._

Lord Aberdeen, with his humble duty, begs to enclose for your
Majesty's information a list of the presents brought by the Envoy of
the Imam of Muscat for your Majesty.

Lord Aberdeen will attend to-morrow with the Envoy, at the hour your
Majesty has been pleased to command; and he will suggest that the
presents should be sent previously to the Palace, in order to be laid
before your Majesty.


[List of Articles sent for Her Most Gracious Majesty, The
         Mighty Queen, a trifling Gift scarce worth being
         mentioned.]

  Two Pearl Necklaces,
  Two Emeralds,
  An Ornament made like a Crown,
  Ten Cashmere Shawls,
  One Box containing four Bottles Otto of Roses.
  Four Horses, before mentioned in a former letter, but for
the transmission of which no opportunity offered in Bombay,
but now sent in my own ship. Through your kindness have
those things taken[44] from Ali bin Nassur, and make an excuse
for me to Her Most Gracious Majesty, and peace be on you!

    [Footnote 44: _I.e._ accept.]





_Lord Fitzgerald and Vesci to Queen Victoria._

INDIA BOARD, _4th July 1842._

... From the seat of war, the intelligence is most satisfactory. The
conduct of the army, its perseverance and its courage, have not been
surpassed in the military history of British India.

Recent events have not, however, changed the views of Lord
Ellenborough as to the general policy which he recommends to be
pursued.

He regards as the best result of that success which has attended
the Arms of your Majesty, that it admits of withdrawing, without
dishonour, the British force to positions of safety, having certain
and uninterrupted communications with the British territory.

From other quarters the reports are equally favourable. The successful
advance of a division commanded by Brigadier-General England may be
regarded as ensuring the safety of the force at Candahar.

In the Indian Dominions and in the native Army the best spirit
prevails.

All of which is most humbly submitted to your Majesty, by your
Majesty's most dutiful Subject and Servant,

FITZGERALD AND VESCI.




[Pageheading: BEAN'S ATTEMPT ON THE QUEEN]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _4th July 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is
anxious to express his earnest hope that your Majesty is well and
not disturbed by the event[45] which took place yesterday, and
which, although it appears not to have been dangerous in itself, is
formidable as affording additional evidence of the ease with which
persons of the lower orders can incite themselves, or be incited by
others, to the contemplation and commission of such acts. The only
observation that can be made upon these attempts is, that hitherto
they appear to have been made by those who have not the means of
executing their own wicked designs, and that they are not marked by
the same determination and the same long and ferocious preparation
which characterised in France the conduct of Fieschi and Alibaud.[46]
Lord Melbourne is not of opinion that the extension of mercy to
Francis--which from what Lord Melbourne hears of the opinion of the
judges he apprehends to have been unavoidable--could have had any
effect in encouraging this man to a similar act; at the same time it
is impossible to say what may have had an effect upon the mind, and
we can only collect the intentions of men from the deeds which they
perform.

Lord Melbourne thanks your Majesty much for your letter of the 26th
ult. Lord Melbourne again expresses his fervent wishes for your
Majesty's health, safety, and tranquillity of mind.

    [Footnote 45: Bean, a deformed lad, presented a pistol at the
    Queen in the Mall.]

    [Footnote 46: The perpetrators of attempts on King Louis
    Philippe.]




[Pageheading: DEATH OF THE DUKE OF ORLEANS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _14th July 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--These two horrible news of poor dear Chartres'[47]
fatal accident have quite overcome us. It is the most dreadful
misfortune I ever remember, and will be felt everywhere. I can't say
_how_ I feel it; I liked and admired him, and know how he was adored
by all of you, and by poor wretched Hélène, whom this will kill. Those
poor helpless little children! it is _too_ melancholy. After escaping
from so many dangers, to be cut off in this way is _too_ dreadful!
God knows what is for our best, but this does seem difficult to
understand. I pray and hope that you will all be mercifully supported
under this heavy bereavement. I think it is so dreadful that poor
Hélène could not be with him in his last moments! God be with you all,
and believe me, ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

I had begun a letter to poor _Chartres_ this morning.

    [Footnote 47: On 13th July the Duke of Orleans (formerly Duc
    de Chartres), eldest son of Louis Philippe, was thrown from
    his phaeton near the Porte Maillot, Paris, and died shortly
    afterwards. He was the father of the Comte de Paris and the
    Duc de Chartres.]




[Pageheading: ACCOUNT OF THE ACCIDENT]


_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _15th July 1842._

MY BELOVED VICTORIA,--You have surely already heard of the heavy
visitation God has sent us. My beloved brother was unexpectedly taken
away from us before yesterday evening. Before yesterday morning he
went to Neuilly to take leave of my parents, previous to his departure
for St Omer. The horses ran away: he had the unfortunate idea to jump
out from his barouche--a thing I cannot understand, as he had on
all occasions an uncommon presence of mind--fell upon his head, and
expired a few hours afterwards, in presence of my too unfortunate
parents, without having recovered his consciousness. It is the
greatest misfortune that could happen to us.

We are quite stunned by the sudden and horrid blow, and I cannot
believe it yet, although I have before me the letter of my poor
parents. They are full of courage and resignation to the will
of Providence; but I do not understand what will become of them,
particularly of my mother, who loved so fondly, and with so much
reason, my brother, and of the too unfortunate Hélène. May God help
them and have mercy on them! Clémentine and Victoire are gone to
Plombières to give to Hélène the fatal news, and bring her back:
it will most probably be her death. My parents wished to see us
immediately, and we go to-morrow to Paris.

I am sure, my beloved Victoria, of the share you will take in the
misfortune, the greatest which could befall us, and I thank you
beforehand for it. God's will be done! May He at least always
bless you, and preserve those you love from all evil and danger! In
affliction as in joy, I am, ever, my beloved Victoria, yours most
devotedly,

LOUISE.




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

CLAREMONT, _16th July 1842._

The Queen is anxious to draw Sir Robert Peel's attention to a
circumstance which she has already some months ago mentioned to him:
this is relative to Sir Edward Disbrowe.[48] The Queen knows that Sir
Robert Peel shares her opinion as to Sir Edward Disbrowe's abilities
not being of the first order, but this is not the only thing; what she
chiefly complains of is his decided unfairness towards Belgium, which
she thinks has always shown itself, and again most strongly in his
last despatches. The King of the Belgians has never dropped a word on
the subject, but the Queen really feels it her duty by her Uncle to
state this frankly to Sir Robert Peel, and to say that she thinks it
highly important that Sir Edward Disbrowe should be removed to some
other Mission. Of course she wishes that this should be done
quietly, but she thinks that with a man like the present King of the
Netherlands, who is continually intriguing in Belgium and making her
Uncle's position very painful, it is of the utmost importance that
our Minister there should be totally _unbiassed_--which Sir Edward
Disbrowe most decidedly is not. Could not Sir T. Cartwright be sent
there, and Sir Edward Disbrowe go to Stockholm? The Queen merely
suggests this; but, of course, as long as the man sent to the Hague is
sensible and _fair_, it is indifferent to her who goes there....

    [Footnote 48: Then British Minister at the Hague.]




[Pageheading: GRIEF OF THE QUEEN]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

CLAREMONT, _17th July 1842._

The Queen had intended to have written to Lord Melbourne some time
ago to have thanked him for his kind letter of the 5th, but she was
so occupied, first of all with the arrival of our brother and sister,
with our removal here, and lastly by the dreadful misfortune at Paris,
which has completely overpowered her, and made her quite ill--that
it prevented her from doing so. The Queen is sure that Lord Melbourne
will have warmly shared the universal horror and regret at the
untimely and fearfully sudden end of so amiable and distinguished a
Prince as poor Chartres (as we all called the Duke of Orleans) was!
The loss to France, and indeed Europe, is very great; but to the Royal
Family, dearest Louise (who all doted on him), and above all to poor
unfortunate Hélène, who adored him (and he was a most devoted husband
to her), and to his two poor little boys of four and one years old--he
is an irreparable loss. The Queen has heard from none yet, but has
seen a letter from Guizot, who was a witness of the _last scene_,
which is quite truly reported in the papers; he says it was
fearful--the poor Duke lying and dying on a mattress on the floor
surrounded by his parents and sisters, kneeling and praying around
their dearly beloved Child! Alas! poor Hélène had not even that
comfort!

The Queen is very glad that the Bill for the better security of her
person has passed so quickly and in so gratifying a manner through
both Houses.

We are here since yesterday week, enjoying the fine weather, and great
quiet and peace; but the news from Paris have damped our spirits.

The Queen is charmed with her new sister,[49] who is a most amiable,
sensible, and gentle creature, and without being really handsome, very
pretty and pleasing.

We return to town to-morrow and the Queen hopes soon to see Lord
Melbourne. We intend going to Windsor to settle, on Saturday.

The Queen trusts Lord Melbourne is quite well.

    [Footnote 49: The Duchess Ernest of Saxe-Coburg.]




[Pageheading: LETTER FROM KING LOUIS PHILIPPE]


_The King of the French to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _17 Juillet 1842._

MADAME MA BIEN CHÈRE ET BIEN BONNE S[OE]UR,--J'ai bien reconnu
le c[oe]ur de votre Majesté dans l'empressement qu'elle a mis à
m'exprimer la part qu'elle prend à mon malheur. Ma malheureuse Reine
en est également bien touchée, et si elle ne le témoigne pas elle-même
dès aujourd'hui à votre Majesté, c'est qu'elle est encore dans
l'impossibilité d'écrire. Nous osons lui demander tous les deux,
d'être notre interprète auprès du Prince Albert, et de lui dire
combien nous sommes sensibles à son intérêt. S'il pouvait y avoir une
consolation au coup affreux qui a frappé nos vieux jours, ce serait
ces témoignages d'intérêt, et les regrets dont on entoure le tombeau
de mon enfant chéri, et la perte immense que tous ont faite en lui!
C'est à présent qu'on sent ce qu'il était, et ce qu'il devenait chaque
jour de plus en plus.

Je remercie de nouveau votre Majesté, du fond de mon c[oe]ur brisé, de
tous les sentiments dont elle veut bien me donner tant de preuves, et
je la prie d'agréer l'expression de la haute estime et de l'inviolable
amitié avec lesquelles, je suis, Madame, ma très chère S[oe]ur, de
votre Majesté, le bien affectionné Frère,

LOUIS PHILIPPE R.




_The Queen of the French to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _19 Juillet 1842._

MADAME MA TRÈS CHÈRE S[OE]UR,--Je comptais que votre Majesté et le
Prince Albert s'associeraient à notre immense douleur; que Dieu vous
bénisse pour les tendres expressions de votre lettre. Nous sommes
anéantis par le coup dont Dieu nous a frappés, que sa Sainte Volonté
soit faite! J'ai perdu l'objet de ma plus vive tendresse, celui qui
depuis 32 ans avait été mon amour, mon bonheur, et ma gloire, plein de
vie, d'avenir, ma tête n'y est plus, mon c[oe]ur est flétri, je tâche
de me résigner, je pleure et je prie pour cette Ame qui m'était si
chère et pour que Dieu nous conserve l'infortuné et précieux Roi dont
la douleur est incommensurable; nous tâchons de nous réunir tous
pour faire un faisceau autour de lui. Notre ange de Louise et votre
excellent oncle sont arrivés avant-hier; leur présence nous a fait
du bien. Hélène, anéantie par la douleur, a un courage admirable, sa
santé se soutient. Nemours, dont l'affliction est inexprimable, tâche
de prendre des forces pour nous consoler tous, et les bonnes Victoire
et Clémentine après l'horrible et douleureuse scène à laquelle elles
avaient assisté, ont passé trois nuits pour aller chercher leur
infortunée Belle-S[oe]ur. Enfin, Dieu veut que nous vivions pour nous
soutenir les uns les autres, que ce Dieu Tout Puissant vous bénisse,
Madame, et vous préserve à jamais de pareilles douleurs, c'est le
v[oe]u bien sincère de celle qui se dit de tout son c[oe]ur, Madame,
De votre Majesté la toute dévouée S[oe]ur,

MARIE AMÉLIE.




[Pageheading: LEIGH HUNT]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _22nd July 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty, and ventures to transmit the
copy of Mr Leigh Hunt's poem, which he mentioned to your Majesty in
his last letter. Lord Melbourne also sends the letter which Mr Leigh
Hunt has taken the liberty of addressing to your Majesty, as well as
that which he has addressed to Lord Melbourne. Lord Melbourne will
inform Mr Hunt that he has done this, and it is not at all required
that any further notice should be taken.[50]

It is a very gay and lively work, and has in it some wit and fun.

Lord Melbourne had great pleasure yesterday in seeing your Majesty
well and in good spirits.

    [Footnote 50: The poem was no doubt _The Palfrey; a Love-Story
    of Old Times_.]




_Mr Leigh Hunt to Viscount Melbourne._

32 EDWARDES SQUARE, KENSINGTON, _15th July 1842._

MY LORD,--I was once speaking to Mr Fonblanque[51] of my unwillingness
to trouble your Lordship, when Prime Minister, with a request to lay
my tragedy of the _Legend of Florence_[52] before Her Majesty; and he
said that he was sure your good-nature would not have been displeased
with it. This is the reason why I now venture to ask whether a similar
kindness might be shown the accompanying little poem, supposing
no etiquette to stand in the way of it. I have no Tory channels of
communication with the Palace, nor wish to seek any; neither can I
trespass upon any friendships of Her Majesty's, unless they can find
my excuse in some previous knowledge of me. On the other hand, I have
no fear of being supposed by your Lordship to approach one who is no
longer Premier with less respect than when he was in power. I would
even venture to say, if the mode of testifying it were not so poor a
one, that it is in a double spirit of respectfulness the application
is made. Should it be of a nature calculated to give your Lordship any
perplexity, I can only blush for having been the occasion of it, and
beg it may be laid to the account of an ignorance which lives very
much out of the world. The same reason will plead my excuse for
not knowing whether a letter to Her Majesty ought, or ought not, to
accompany the book; and for begging your Lordship, after its perusal,
to suppress it or otherwise accordingly, in case you can oblige me
in the other part of my request. Your Lordship will perceive that the
Address prefixed to the poem, not having ventured to ask Her Majesty's
permission, does not presume to call itself a dedication; neither does
it leave the public under any erroneous impression whatsoever as to
the nature of its intentions: and on this account I not only expect,
of course, no acknowledgment of its receipt on the part of any
one about Her Majesty's person, but shall be more than content to
understand by your Lordship's own silence that my book has reached its
destination, and therefore not been considered altogether unworthy of
it.

The bookseller tells me that it is no longer "the mode" for authors to
present their volumes _bound_; but in regard to books intended to go
to Court, he is not quite so certain; and I find it so difficult to
disassociate the idea of dress from any such proceeding, that I trust
my inexperience in this respect also will procure me whatever pardon
it may require.

I have the honour to be, my Lord, your Lordship's ever grateful and
faithful Servant,

LEIGH HUNT.

    [Footnote 51: Hunt had founded _The Examiner_ in 1808, and
    Albany Fonblanque (1793-1872) had succeeded him on it as
    leader writer.]

    [Footnote 52: Leigh Hunt's play, _A Legend of Florence_, had
    had a great success at Covent Garden in 1840; in 1852 it was
    performed at Windsor by the Queen's command.]




[Pageheading: THE AFFLICTED FAMILY]


_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _21st July 1842._

MY BELOVED VICTORIA,--I was unable to thank you the other day for your
kind and feeling letter of the 14th, although I was greatly touched
by it, and I trust you will have excused me. I thank you to-day very
sincerely for both your letters, and for the share and sympathy you
and dear Albert take in our _great misfortune_. I know it is very
heart-felt, and we are all very grateful for it. Victoire and my poor
mother have already given you news from the unfortunate Hélène.
She has sustained and outlived the first shock and shows wonderful
courage. She is even well in health, and much better and stronger
in all ways than I had expected. She takes very much upon herself
on account of the poor children, to prevent that any melancholy or
painful feeling should be connected for them with the remembrance of
their beloved and unfortunate father. My parents show great fortitude
and resignation, but their hearts are for ever broke. They are only
sustained by their feeling of duty. My poor mother bears up for my
father, and my father bears up to fulfil his duties of father and of
king. Their health is, thank God! good, and my father retains all his
strength of mind and quickness of judgment; but they are both grown
old in looks, and their hairs are turned quite white.

The first days, my poor father could do nothing but sob, and it was
really heartbreaking to see him. He begins now to have more command
upon his grief, and the presence of your uncle, whom he dearly loves,
seems to do him good. The poor children are well and _merry_ and seem
unconscious of their dreadful loss. From time to time only they jump
round us as if looking for protection. The contrast of their gaiety
with their horrid misfortune is very painful. Paris is looking
remarkably well and strong. Robert[53] is much grown, extremely quick
and lively, and begins to speak. The remainder of the family is,
as you may easily imagine, in the _deepest affliction_. Nemours
especially is quite broken down with grief. Chartres was _more_ than
a _brother_ to him, as he was _more_ than a _second father_ to us all.
He was the _head_ and the _heart_ and _soul_ of the whole family. We
all looked up to him, and we found him on all occasions. A _better_,
or even _such_ a brother was never seen; our loss is as great as
irreparable; but God's will be done! He had surely His motives in
sending on my unfortunate parents the horrid affliction in their
old days, and in removing from us the being who seemed the _most
necessary_ to the hope and happiness of all; we must submit to His
decrees, hard as they are; but it is impossible not to regret that my
poor brother has not at least found the death of a soldier, which
he had always wished for, instead of such a useless, horrid, and
miserable one! It seems, for no one saw him fall, that he did not
jump, as we had thought at first, but that he was thrown from the
barouche, while standing; and I like it in some measure better so, as
God's will is still more manifest in this way. It is equally manifest
in _all_ the circumstances attending the catastrophe. My poor brother
was not even to have come to Neuilly. He had taken leave of my parents
the day before, and would not have gone again if my unfortunate mother
had not asked him, and if my parents, who were to go to Paris, had not
delayed their departure....

I thank you again and again, my beloved Victoria, for all your
interest and sympathy. I was sure you would think of us and of me: you
know how much I loved my brother. I little expected to outlive him, as
I had done my beloved Mary;[54] but once more, _God's will be done_. I
remain now and ever, yours most devotedly,

LOUISE.

I perceive I forgot mentioning Ernest. Pray thank him for his sympathy
also. He knows what a brother is, and may feel for us! We expect on
Saturday poor Joinville. My father will have thus his four remaining
sons round him for the opening of the Session, which takes place on
the 26th, and at which he must preside in person. It is a hard duty
for him.

    [Footnote 53: The young Duc de Chartres, born in 1840.]

    [Footnote 54: See _ante_, p. 144. (Ch. VIII, Footnote 8)]




[Pageheading: THE CORN LAWS]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _23rd July 1842._

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave to
acquaint your Majesty that last night was occupied in the House of
Commons with another debate on the Corn Laws, again impeding any
progress with the Government business. The debate was entirely
confined to those members who act in concert with the Anti-Corn Law
League.[55] It continued until twelve, when Mr Cobden, the Member for
Stockport, moved an adjournment of the House, on the ground that none
of your Majesty's servants had taken a part in the debate....

Several members of the Opposition voted with the Government, and
declared that they would not be parties to such vexatious proceedings.

A division on the main question--a Committee to enquire into the state
of the country with a view to the Repeal of the Corn Laws--then took
place.

The motion was negatived by a majority of 156 to 64--92. The House did
not adjourn until three this morning.

    [Footnote 55: The Anti-Corn Law League was rapidly gaining
    importance, and fiscal policy occupied a great part of the
    session of 1842. Peel was already reducing import duties
    on articles other than corn. Cobden had been elected at
    Stockport, for the first time, in 1841.]




[Pageheading: FURTHER PARTICULARS OF ACCIDENT]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

NEUILLY, _22nd July 1842._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I was anxious to write to you on the 18th, but
I was so overpowered with all that surrounded me that I could really
not. Yesterday I received your dear letter of the 19th, and I will
answer it, so as to give you a clear view of the sad case. On the
12th, Tuesday, Chartres had taken leave, as he meant to go to St Omer,
the 13th; however, in the family the Queen and others said he ought to
come once more to see them. The King had ordered his carriage to go to
town on the 13th, to a Council; Chartres meant to have called shortly
after ten.

It is necessary to tell you all this, as it shows how strangely
circumstances turned fatally. Chartres did not want to return once
more to Neuilly, and the King, if exact, might see him once more
in town. Chartres, however, instead of coming early, set off after
eleven; his Off. d'Ordonnance, M. Bertin de Veaux, his _valet de
chambre_, a German, Holder, begged him not to go quite alone in that
small phaeton through Paris, as he was in uniform, but all this did
not avail; he insisted to go in the phaeton and to go _alone_. He set
out later than he expected, and if the King had set out _exactly_ as
he had named, the parents and the son would probably have met on the
rising avenue of the Champs Elysees, towards the Barrière de l'Étoile
and Arc de Triomphe. However, the King delayed his departure and the
son set off. At the place where from the great avenue one turns off
towards Neuilly, the horses, which were not even young horses, as I am
told that he has had them some years, moved by that stupid longing to
get to Neuilly, where they knew their stables, got rather above
the postillion, and ran _quasi_ away. Chartres got up and asked the
postillion if he could hold his horses no longer; the boy called out
"Non, Monseigneur"; he had looked back when he said this, and saw his
master for the last time _standing_ in the phaeton. People at some
distance saw him come out of his carriage and describe a sort of
semicircle falling down. Nobody knows exactly if he jumped out of the
carriage, or if he lost his position and fell out. I am inclined to
think that, trusting to his lightness and agility, he wanted to jump
out, forgetting the impulse which a quick-going carriage gives, as
there were marks on his knees as if he had first fallen that way. The
principal blow was, however, on the head, the skull being entirely
fractured. He was taken up senseless, that is to say confused, but
not fainting, and carried into a small inn. At first his appearance,
sitting in a chair, was so little altered that people thought it was
nothing of any consequence.

He _knew_ no one, and only spoke a few incoherent words in German. The
accident happened about a quarter before twelve, and at four he was no
more.

I refer for some other details to Albert. Poor Louise looks like a
shadow, and only her great devotion for me supports her. It may serve
as a lesson how fragile all human affairs are. Poor Chartres, it
seems, with the prospect of these camps and altogether, was _never
in better spirits_. But I must end. Ever, my dearest Victoria, your
devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




[Pageheading: SIR EDWARD DISBROWE]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _27th July 1842._

The Queen thanks Lord Aberdeen for the letter she has this morning
received.

The Queen thinks that a reprimand would hardly do, as it is not so
much from any particular despatch that she has formed this opinion of
Sir Edward Disbrowe, but more from the general tenor of his conduct
and despatches; therefore she thinks it would be difficult to censure
him, which would probably not have the desired effect.[56] For this
reason the Queen would prefer his being removed without his being told
that it was for his conduct, and without his being able to find this
out, which, the Queen concludes from Lord Aberdeen's letter, could
easily be done.

    [Footnote 56: _See_ p. 409. Lord Aberdeen had suggested
    sending Sir Edward Disbrowe a private admonition.]
      (Ch. XI, 16th July, 1842)




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _2nd August 1842._

DEAREST UNCLE,--I had the pleasure of receiving your kind letter of
the 29th, late on Sunday evening. You know _all_ we have felt, and
do _feel_, for the dear and exemplary French family. Really it is too
dreadful, but God's will be done! Perhaps poor Chartres is saved great
sorrow and grief. _Him_ we must _not_ pity!

God grant all may go off well on these dreadful days, and may He
support the dear afflicted parents, widow, and brothers and sisters!
My dearest Louise! I hope and trust that her dear children will occupy
her and divert her attention; only don't let her swallow and suppress
her grief and keep it to herself; that is dreadful, and very hurtful.
Let her give way to her sorrow, and talk of it to her.

Pray, dearest Uncle, will not and ought not Paris to be Duke of
Orleans now? Hélène is sole guardian, is she not?...

Dear Louise will, I trust, excuse my not answering her kind letter
to-day; pray give her my best love, and believe me, always, your most
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: THE FATHERLESS CHILDREN]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _5th August 1842._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--... Little Paris,[57] who has gained much of
late, will keep the name of Paris, at least for the present. Hélène
will be, after the poor King's demise, sole guardian of her children;
till then the King as head of the family will be supreme in all
matters relating to the children.... Your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

    [Footnote 57: The late Comte de Paris, who bore this title to
    the end of his life, father of the present Duc d'Orléans.]




_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _5th August 1842._

MY BELOVED VICTORIA,--... Poor little Paris is aware of his misfortune
in the way he can be. Hélène told him that he saw everybody weep
because he would see no more his beloved father. The poor child wept
then very much, and he has done several times since, when the same
thing was repeated to him. He wonders why he does not go any more
in his unfortunate father's room, and why there is no more "_de cher
Papa_," as he says: else he makes no question or observation and is
very quiet and cheerful. He cannot yet feel what he has lost and his
melancholy fate: but Hélène does what she can to keep alive in him the
remembrance of his father.... Yours most affectionately,

LOUISE.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _8th August 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He thanks
your Majesty much for the letter of the 4th. It can hardly be expected
that the grief of the French family will, as yet, much diminish, but
Lord Melbourne hopes that they are somewhat more composed. He has
heard this morning that Lord and Lady Beauvale were at Boulogne on
Saturday; they would probably cross yesterday, and will be in London
to-day.

Lord Melbourne understands that Lord Beauvale had an interview of
three hours with the King of the French. Charles Howard was married
this morning, and Lord Melbourne is going to meet Lord and Lady
Carlisle and the rest of the family at Baron Parke's[58] at dinner.
Lord Melbourne thinks that Lord Prudhoe's marriage[59] was to be
expected.[60] Upon looking at the Peerage, he is only fifty years old,
and fifty is young enough to marry anybody. The only fault of fifty is
that it advances too rapidly on to sixty, which, on the other hand, is
too old to marry anybody. It is Lord Melbourne's opinion that if a man
does marry either at fifty or sixty, he had much better take a young
girl than a woman of more age and experience. Youth is more malleable,
more gentle, and has often more respect and compassion for infirmity
than middle-age.

    [Footnote 58: Afterwards Lord Wensleydale.]

    [Footnote 59: To Lady Eleanor Grosvenor.]

    [Footnote 60: Admiral Lord Algernon Percy (1792-1865),
    President of the Royal Institution, was created in 1816 Baron
    Prudhoe: in 1847, on the death of his brother, he became
    fourth Duke of Northumberland.]




[Pageheading: RESIGNATION OF LORD HILL]


_Lord Hill to Queen Victoria._

HARDWICKE GRANGE,[61] _9th August 1842._

Lord Hill presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and craves
your Majesty's gracious permission to lay before your Majesty his
resignation of the Command of your Majesty's Army.

Lord Hill deeply regrets the necessity of taking a step which will
deprive him of a charge that has been so long committed to his hands,
and for his continuance in which he is indebted to your Majesty's
grace and favour; but he has again suffered much from the illness
under which he laboured in the early part of the year, and his health
has in consequence become so indifferent as to render him unequal to
the adequate discharge of the various important duties of his command,
which therefore he feels he could not retain with due regard to the
interests of your Majesty's Service.

Lord Hill had flattered himself that he should have been able to have
laid his application for retirement before your Majesty himself, and
personally to have expressed to your Majesty his deep and lasting
sense of your Majesty's gracious kindness to him on all occasions.
Having, however, left London by the advice of his medical attendants,
and being too unwell to undertake a second journey, Lord Hill avails
himself of this mode of assuring your Majesty of his unabated zeal for
the Service, of his dutiful devotion to your Majesty's person, and
of the pain and sorrow with which he relinquishes an appointment that
afforded him the honour and advantage of executing your Majesty's
commands, and receiving many gracious proofs of your Majesty's support
and confidence.

    [Footnote 61: Lord Hill's country house in Shropshire.]




[Pageheading: APPOINTMENT OF COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _10th August 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to acquaint your Majesty that he received at a late hour last
night the accompanying letter to your Majesty from Lord Hill. From the
one which accompanied it, addressed to Sir Robert Peel, he has reason
to believe that it conveys to your Majesty the wish of Lord Hill to be
relieved, on the ground of ill-health and increasing infirmities, from
the Command of your Majesty's Forces.

Sir Robert Peel would humbly submit for your Majesty's consideration
whether it might not be a deserved mark of your Majesty's approbation
to confer upon Lord Hill the rank of Viscount, with remainder to his
nephew Sir Rowland Hill,[62] who will succeed Lord Hill in the Barony.
Lord Beresford[63] and Lord Combermere[64] have the rank of
Viscounts, and perhaps the long, faithful services of Lord Hill as
Commander-in-Chief may appear to your Majesty to entitle him to equal
distinction in the Peerage.

Sir Robert Peel has reason to believe that when Lord Hill's retirement
shall be known there will be many competitors for the office of
Commander-in-Chief.

Sir George Murray,[65] Sir Edward Paget,[66] Lord Londonderry,[67]
Lord Combermere, and perhaps Lord Beresford, will severally urge their
pretensions.

Sir Robert Peel humbly submits to your Majesty that should the Duke of
Wellington be willing to undertake the duties of this important trust,
no claims could stand in competition with his, and no selection from
the candidates whom he has named would be satisfactory to the Army or
public in general.

Sir Robert Peel would therefore humbly recommend to your Majesty
that the offer of this appointment should be made to the Duke of
Wellington, with the signification of a wish on the part of
your Majesty (should your Majesty be pleased to approve of the
arrangement), that His Grace should continue a member of the Cabinet,
and the organ of the Government, as at present, in the House of Lords.

    [Footnote 62: Lord Hill died 10th December 1842, and was
    succeeded in his peerages by Sir Rowland Hill, who died in
    1875.]

    [Footnote 63: William Carr Beresford (1768-1854), created
    Viscount Beresford in 1823 for the victory of Albuera, 1811.]

    [Footnote 64: Sir Stapleton Cotton (1773-1865), created
    Viscount Combermere for the capture of Bhurtpore.]

    [Footnote 65: Sir George Murray (1772-1846), received a
    K.C.B. for his services in the Peninsula, M.P. for Perth, and
    afterwards Commander-in-Chief in Ireland.]

    [Footnote 66: General Sir Edward Paget, G.C.B. (1775-1849),
    brother of the first Marquis of Anglesey.]

    [Footnote 67: Prior to being Ambassador at Vienna, Lord
    Londonderry had distinguished himself in the Peninsula.]





[Pageheading: THE DUKE ACCEPTS]


_The Duke of Wellington to Queen Victoria._

LONDON, _12th August 1842._

Field-Marshal the Duke of Wellington presents his humble duty to your
Majesty. He has been informed by Sir Robert Peel that your Majesty had
been graciously pleased to approve of the recommendation submitted
by your Majesty's servants that he should be appointed the
Commander-in-Chief of your Majesty's Forces.

He is sensible of and grateful for this fresh proof of your Majesty's
confidence in him and gracious favour towards him.

He hopes that your Majesty will believe that your Majesty may rely
upon his making every effort in his power to promote your Majesty's
views for the honour and interest of the country in any situation in
which he may be placed.

Which is humbly submitted to your Majesty by your Majesty's most
dutiful and devoted Subject and Servant,

WELLINGTON.




_Queen Victoria to Lord Hill._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _12th August 1842._

The Queen has received Lord Hill's letter of the 9th inst., and is
much concerned to learn that Lord Hill's health is so indifferent that
he thinks it is his duty to resign the important office which he has
so long and so honourably held. The Queen can only reluctantly give
her consent to this determination, as she regrets to lose Lord Hill's
services at the head of her Army. She cannot, however, miss this
opportunity of expressing to Lord Hill her entire approbation of his
conduct throughout the time he served her. The Prince begs to have his
kind regards sent to Lord Hill.




[Pageheading: RIOTS IN MANCHESTER]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

CABINET ROOM, DOWNING STREET, _13th August 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and is sorry
to be under the necessity of troubling your Majesty so suddenly, but
he is sure your Majesty will excuse him for making any proposal to
your Majesty which the public service may render requisite.[68]

The accounts received this morning from Manchester with regard to the
state of the country in that neighbourhood are very unsatisfactory,
and they are confirmed by the personal testimony of magistrates who
have arrived in London for the purpose of making representations to
your Majesty's servants on the subject.

A Cabinet has just been held, and it is proposed to send a battalion
of Guards by the railway this evening. The 16th of August (Tuesday
next) is the anniversary of a conflict which took place in Manchester
in the year 1819[69] between the Yeomanry Cavalry and the populace,
and it is feared that there may be a great assemblage of persons
riotously disposed on that day.

Under these circumstances it appears desirable to your Majesty's
confidential advisers that a proclamation should be immediately
issued, warning all persons against attendance on tumultuous meetings,
and against all acts calculated to disturb the public peace. It
is necessary that a Council should be held for the issue of this
proclamation, and important that it should arrive in Manchester on
Monday.

These considerations have prevented Sir Robert Peel from giving
previous notice to your Majesty, and having your Majesty's sanction
for the holding of a Council. On account of the urgency of the case,
he has requested a sufficient number of Privy Councillors to repair to
Windsor this evening, in order that should your Majesty be graciously
pleased to hold a Council, the proclamation may be forthwith issued.
The members of the Privy Council will be in attendance about half-past
six o'clock, as Sir Robert Peel has considered that from that time
to half-past seven will probably be the least inconvenient to your
Majesty.

He writes this immediately after the breaking up of the Cabinet.

    [Footnote 68: The disturbances of this month, which originated
    in a strike for wages in Lancashire, were inflamed by
    agitators, and rapidly spread through Cheshire, Staffordshire,
    Warwickshire, and Yorkshire, eventually extending to the
    populous parts of Scotland and Wales. Several conflicts took
    place between the populace and the military, and there
    was much loss of life and property, as well as aggravated
    distress.]

    [Footnote 69: On 16th August 1819, a great popular
    demonstration in favour of Parliamentary Reform, presided
    over by Henry Hunt, the Radical, had taken place in St Peter's
    Fields, Manchester. A riot ensued, and the Yeomanry charged
    the populace, with some loss of life. The affair was
    afterwards known as the Peterloo massacre.]




[Pageheading: CHARTIST DISTURBANCES]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _15th August 1842._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty, begs to lay before your Majesty
the enclosed letter from Major-General Sir William Warre[70] in
command of the Northern District.

From this report it is evident that a strong and salutary moral
impression had been produced by the arrival of a reinforcement
of 1,400 men in the disturbed district in the short time of
six-and-thirty hours after the first requisition for assistance had
been sent from Manchester; and the General has now at his disposal a
force quite adequate to cope with the vast assemblage of people who
are expected to meet to-morrow at Manchester.

Some symptoms of this disposition forcibly to suspend labour have
appeared in the West Riding of Yorkshire; but on the whole the
accounts, both from Scotland and the disturbed district, which have
been received this morning, may be considered favourable. The railroad
communications as yet are uninterrupted; no collision has taken place
between the troops and the multitude, except at Preston;[71] and Sir
James Graham is willing to hope that this insurrectionary movement may
be suppressed without recourse to extreme measures. Every precaution,
however, has been taken, and arrangements are made for augmenting
the force under the command of Sir William Warre, if it should become
necessary.

The character of these riots has assumed more decidedly a political
aspect. It is no longer a strike for higher wages, but the Delegates,
who direct the movement, avow that labour shall not be resumed until
the people's Charter be granted.[72]

Sir James Graham will hasten to-morrow to inform your Majesty of the
accounts which he may receive.

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's dutiful Subject and
Servant,

J. R. G. GRAHAM.

    [Footnote 70: Lieutenant-General Sir William Warre
    (1784-1853), a distinguished Peninsular officer.]

    [Footnote 71: The mob attacked the military, who fired and
    killed three or four persons.]

    [Footnote 72: A colossal petition in favour of the Charter had
    been presented during the Session by Mr T. Duncombe.]




[Pageheading: SATISFACTORY RESULTS]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _18th August 1842._ (_Thursday morning._)

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to acquaint your Majesty that he returned to London last night.

He has this morning gone through all the letters received from the
country, with Sir James Graham, by whom the details of the information
will be forwarded to your Majesty.

It appears to Sir Robert Peel that the general tenor of the reports is
_satisfactory_. From Manchester, from Wigan, from Preston, the reports
are very good.

The movement is not one caused by distress. The demand for employment
has increased, and the price of provisions--and particularly of
potatoes, bread, and bacon--has rapidly fallen within the last
fortnight or three weeks.

People of property and the Magistrates (notwithstanding their
political dissensions) are now acting in harmony, and with more
energy.

Orders have been sent to apprehend the Delegates assembled in
Manchester, _the very moment_ that the law will warrant their
apprehension, and Sir Robert Peel should not be surprised to hear of
their committal to Lancaster Castle in the course of to-day.

Every vigilance will be exerted with reference to _Cooper_[73] (whom
your Majesty names) and all other itinerant agitators.

As might be naturally expected, the movements and disorderly spirit
spreading from the centre (Manchester) are appearing in remote points;
but when peace and confidence are thoroughly restored at Manchester,
the example will quickly tell in the circumjacent districts.

Birmingham is tranquil and well-disposed. The accounts from Scotland
are favourable.

    [Footnote 73: A Leicester Chartist, who was afterwards tried
    for sedition.]




[Pageheading: PARLIAMENT PROROGUED]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _17th August 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He is going
down to-day to Brocket Hall with Lord and Lady Beauvale. Lord and Lady
Palmerston are coming down to-morrow, and Lord and Lady Cowper will
probably come over from Panshanger.

Your Majesty read extremely well in the House of Lords on Friday
last.[74] Lord Melbourne can judge better of this from the body of the
House than he could when he stood close to your Majesty. Nothing can
be more clear and distinct, and at the same time more natural and free
from effort. Perhaps if your Majesty could read a tone louder it would
be as well. Charles Buller, who was amongst the House of Commons, told
Lord Melbourne that, where he stood, the voice, although well heard,
sounded somewhat weak. But this should not be attempted unless it
can be done with perfect ease. Nothing injures reading so much as the
attempt to push the organ beyond its natural powers.

Lord Melbourne hopes that these tumults in the manufacturing districts
are subsiding, but he cannot conceal from your Majesty that he views
them with great alarm--much greater than he generally thinks it
prudent to express. He fears that they may last in the form of strike,
and turn out much longer than is looked for, as they did in 1832 and
1833.

There is a great mass of discontented feeling in the country arising
from the actual state of society. It arises from the distress and
destitution which will fall at times upon a great manufacturing
population, and from the wild and extravagant opinions which are
naturally generated in an advanced and speculative state of society.

This discontent has been aggravated and fermented by the language of
every party in the state. Lord Melbourne can exempt no party from
this blame, nor hardly any individual except himself. The Tories and
Conservatives (not the Leaders, but the larger portion of the party)
have done what they could to inflame the public mind upon that most
inflammable topic of the Poor Laws. The _Times_ newspaper has been the
most forward in this. The Whigs and Radicals have done what they could
in the same direction upon the Corn Laws. Mr Attwood[75] and another
set have worked the question of the Currency, and the whole career of
Mr O'Connell in Ireland has been too manifest to be mistaken. It is
no wonder if working in this manner altogether they have at last
succeeded in driving the country into this which is certainly very
near, if not actually a rebellion.

Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes that your Majesty and the Prince, the
Prince, and Princess are all well.


    [Footnote 74: Parliament was prorogued by the Queen in person
    on 12th August.]

    [Footnote 75: Who represented the Radical views of the
    Birmingham school.]




[Pageheading: THE DISTURBED DISTRICTS]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _18th August 1842._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty, is happily enabled to state to
your Majesty that the accounts from the disturbed districts received
this morning are more satisfactory.

In Lancashire a disposition to resume work has been partially evinced;
and at Preston, where the most vigorous measures were taken in the
first instance, there has hardly been a cessation of employment.

Sir James Graham encloses a letter from the Chief Constable of the
County of Lancashire detailing a successful resistance to a fresh
attempt on the part of a mob to enter Preston; and he sends also
a report from the Mayor of Manchester and from Mr Forster, the
Stipendiary Magistrate. Decisive measures will be adopted for the
immediate apprehension of the Delegates, not only at Manchester, but
in every other quarter where legal evidence can be obtained which will
justify their arrest. The law, which clearly sanctions resistance to
the entry of these mobs into cities, is now understood by the local
authorities. A bolder and firmer spirit is rising among all classes
possessing property in defence of their rights against these bands
of plunderers, who are the enemies both of law and of property.
The prisoners taken in the commission of treasonable felonies are
numerous; warrants are issued against others whose persons are known:
the supremacy of the law will be promptly vindicated, and Sir James
Graham entertains the confident hope that order will be soon restored.

In the Potteries a signal example was made by a handful of your
Majesty's troops opposed to a riotous multitude which had burnt houses
and spread devastation, and Sir James Graham encloses a letter from
Captain Powys giving a description of the occurrence. The effect
of this example has been that yesterday throughout this district no
rioting took place.




[Pageheading: DISTURBANCES IN LONDON]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _19th August 1842._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty, begs to announce to your Majesty
that the accounts from the North, on the whole, may be considered
satisfactory....

Five of the principal Delegates at Manchester have been apprehended.
Warrants are out against four others. A very important seizure of
papers has been made which discloses a conspiracy, extensive in its
ramifications, going back as far as July 1841. It is hoped that these
papers, which are still at Manchester, may lead to fresh discoveries.
Sir James Graham will send to Manchester to-night an experienced law
officer, for the purpose of pursuing the investigation on the spot.

There was a meeting last night in the neighbourhood of London, of a
violent character. Sir James Graham had given positive orders to the
police not to allow any mob, as night approached, to enter London.
Notwithstanding these directions, a mob assembled in Lincoln's Inn
Fields about eleven o'clock, and moved through the city to Bethnal
Green. Sir James Graham had the troops on the alert, but the multitude
dispersed without any serious disturbance.




_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

_20th August 1842._

... An attempt to hold a meeting at dusk in the suburbs of London was
resisted by the police yesterday evening in pursuance of orders issued
by the Government in conjunction with the Lord Major, and the peace of
the metropolis was preserved.

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's dutiful Subject and
Servant,

J. R. G. GRAHAM.




[Pageheading: TROUBLE AT THE CAPE]


_Lord Stanley to Queen Victoria._

DOWNING STREET, _26th August 1842._

Lord Stanley, with his humble duty, submits for your Majesty's perusal
copies of three despatches, received yesterday from the Governor of
the Cape of Good Hope, detailing the unfortunate result of an attack
made by a small party of your Majesty's troops upon the camp of the
insurgent Boers at Natal; and also the copy of a despatch which Lord
Stanley has sent in consequence to Sir George Napier,[76] which, he
trusts, may meet your Majesty's approbation. Lord Stanley would have
submitted the draft for your Majesty's approval previous to sending
it, had not an opportunity presented itself of sending it off by a
fast-sailing private ship which sailed this morning, the intelligence
having only been received yesterday. The instructions sent to Sir
George Napier, on the 10th of April, but not received when this
unfortunate affair took place, were in substance not to attempt the
subjugation of these people by direct force, but to warn them that
their titles to the land which they occupy would not be recognised by
your Majesty, that they would have no title to claim protection from
the aggression of the neighbouring tribes, to interdict communication
between them and the settled parts of the Colony, and to prevent any
intercourse by sea with foreign or British traders. The unfortunate
event which has now occurred will render it necessary to take steps,
as Sir George Napier has already done, for vindicating the power of
your Majesty's Arms; but when that shall have been effected, Lord
Stanley would still hope that a considerable number of these misguided
men may be induced to return to their allegiance, and to the settled
parts of your Majesty's dominions, and he feels confident that in such
an event he will be fulfilling your Majesty's wishes in directing that
they may be treated with all possible lenity.

All which is humbly submitted by your Majesty's most dutiful Servant
and Subject,

STANLEY.

    [Footnote 76: Sir George Napier (1784-1855) governed Cape
    Colony for seven years, and the Boers were extruded from Natal
    by him.]




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

BUSHEY HOUSE, _7th September 1842._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--... Your Mamma's visit gave me great pleasure, and
it has been a great treat to me to hear her sing again, and _so well_,
which put me in mind of former happy days. I regret _much_ that she
leaves me already this afternoon again, but the strong and powerful
_magnet_ which you have left at the Castle draws her back, and I dare
not keep her away from such treasures.

I beg you, my dearest Victoria, to give my affectionate love to dear
Albert, and to believe me ever most devotedly, your very affectionate
Aunt,

ADELAIDE.




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN VISITS SCOTLAND]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

TAYMOUTH,[77] _8th September 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I make no excuses for not having written, as I know
that you will understand that when one is travelling about and seeing
so much that is _totally_ new, it is very difficult to find time to
write....

Albert has told you already how successfully everything had gone off
hitherto, and how much pleased we were with Edinburgh, which is an
unique town in its way. We left Dalkeith on Monday, and lunched at
Dupplin, Lord Kinnoul's, a pretty place with quite a new house, and
which poor Lord Kinnoul displayed so well as to fall head over heels
down a steep bank, and was proceeding down another, if Albert had not
caught him; I did not see it, but Albert and I have nearly died with
laughing at the _relation_ of it. From Dalkeith we went through Perth
(which is _most_ beautifully situated on the Tay) to Scone Palace,[78]
Lord Mansfield's, where we slept; fine but rather gloomy. Yesterday
morning (Tuesday) we left Scone and lunched at Dunkeld, the beginning
of the Highlands, in a tent; _all_ the Highlanders in their fine
dress, being encamped there, and with their old shields and swords,
looked very romantic; they were chiefly Lord Glenlyon's[79] men.
_He_, poor man! is suddenly become _totally_ blind, and it was very
melancholy to see him do the _honours_, _not_ seeing _anything_. The
situation of Dunkeld, down in a valley surrounded by wooded hills,
is very, very pretty. From thence we proceeded to this enchanting
and princely place; the whole drive here was beautiful. All Lord
Breadalbane's[80] Highlanders, with himself at their head, and a
battalion of the 92nd Highlanders, were drawn up in front of the
House. In the evening the grounds were splendidly illuminated, and
bonfires burning on the hills; and a number of Highlanders danced
reels by torchlight, to the bagpipes, which was very wild and
pretty....

    [Footnote 77: Lord Breadalbane's house. The Queen left London
    on 29th August for Scotland by sea, reaching Edinburgh on 1st
    September.]

    [Footnote 78: Scone Abbey was granted to Sir David Murray
    (afterwards Viscount Stormont) by James VI. of Scotland, whose
    cup-bearer he was, and whose life he saved.]

    [Footnote 79: Afterwards George, sixth Duke of Atholl
    (1814-1864).]

    [Footnote 80: John, second Marquis of Breadalbane, K.T.
    (1796-1862).]




[Pageheading: DRUMMOND CASTLE]


_Queen Victoria to Viscount Melbourne._

TAYMOUTH, _10th September 1842._

It has been long the Queen's intention to write to Lord Melbourne, but
we have seen and done so much, it has been impossible. Everything
has gone off so well at Edinburgh, Perth, and elsewhere. This is a
princely and most beautiful place, and we have been entertained by
Lord Breadalbane in a magnificent way. The Highland Volunteers, two
hundred in number (without the officers), keeping guard, are encamped
in the park; the whole place was twice splendidly illuminated, and the
sport he gave the Prince out shooting was on the largest scale.

The Highlands and the mountains are too beautiful, and we _must_ come
back for longer another time. The Queen will finish this letter at
Drummond Castle,[81] as we leave this in half an hour.

_Drummond Castle, 11th._--We arrived here yesterday evening at seven,
having had a most beautiful journey. We went with Lord Breadalbane
up the Loch Tay (by water) to Ochmore[82] (I don't know _how_ it is
written), a cottage belonging to Lord Breadalbane, close to Killin.
The morning was very fine, and the view indescribably beautiful; the
mountains so high, and so wooded close to Killin. It is impossible to
say how kind and attentive Lord Breadalbane and poor Lady Breadalbane
(who is so wretchedly delicate) were to us. We were so sorry to
go away, and might perhaps have managed to stay two days longer at
Taymouth, were we not fearful of delaying our sea voyage back too
much. However, we mean to visit him for longer another time; the
Highlands are so beautiful, and so new to _me_, that we are most
anxious to return there again.

The journey from Killin to Comrie was _most_ beautiful, and through
such wild scenery--Glen Ogle, which of course Lord Melbourne
knows--and then along Loch Ern. This house is quite a cottage, but
the situation is fine, and the garden very beautiful. We leave this
on Tuesday for Dalkeith[83] where we sleep, and re-embark the next day
for _England_. We greatly admire the extreme beauty of Edinburgh; the
situation as well as the town is most striking; and the Prince, who
has seen so much, says it is the finest town he ever saw. Scone
Palace (where we slept on Tuesday night) is fine, but gloomy; Perth is
beautiful.

The Queen hopes Lord Melbourne is very well. The Prince begs to be
remembered to him.

Dalkeith is a fine good house, and the park and grounds very pretty.

    [Footnote 81: The seat of Lord Willoughby d'Eresby.]

    [Footnote 82: It should be written Auchmore.]

    [Footnote 83: The seat of the Duke of Buccleuch.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _20th September 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Pray accept my best thanks for your kind letter of
the 15th, which I received on Saturday, the day of our arrival here.
Dearest Louise will have told you what I wrote to her. We had a speedy
and prosperous voyage home of forty-eight hours, on board a fine large
and very fast steamer, the _Trident_, belonging to the General Steam
Navigation Company. We found our dear little Victoria so grown and so
improved, and speaking so plain, and become so independent; I think
really few children are as forward as she is. She is quite a dear
little companion. The Baby is sadly backward, but also grown, and very
strong. I am so distressed about dearest Louise's still coughing,
but she tells me it is decreasing. Only pray let her give way to her
grief; much crying, even if it makes her cough for the moment, can
do her no real harm, but stifling and swallowing _grief_ (which she
_cannot_ repress) gnaws at the very roots of life and undermines
health. Ostend and sea-baths would, I should think, do her good.

I am very glad that you went to see the King of Prussia, and saw so
many old friends; Fritz of Mecklenburg[84] is, you know, Albert's very
dear friend; he is just arrived here.

Alexandrine's brother everybody praises; the whole family are handsome
and well brought up.

The Archduke Frederic[85] comes here to-morrow for a week's visit.
Everybody praises him, and Ferdinand liked him very much; all Archduke
Charles's[86] sons are said to be very well brought up. How I wish
Archduke John[87] had come over here!

Now, dearest Uncle, adieu! and pray believe me, always, your most
affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

It would be _very_ kind of you if you would tell me if there is a
chance of Augustus's marrying Clementine.[88] Don't believe I should
say a word _against_ it; but I have heard so much about it that I
should be really and sincerely glad to know a _little_ of the _truth_
from _you_.

    [Footnote 84: Frederic William (1819-1904), afterwards Grand
    Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. See _post_, p 434. (Ch. XI, Footnote 93)]

    [Footnote 85: Son of the Archduke Charles.]

    [Footnote 86: (1771-1847), third son of the Emperor Leopold
    II. Distinguished in the Napoleonic wars.]

    [Footnote 87: (1782-1859), younger son of the Emperor Leopold
    II. Commanded on the Rhine, 1815. Administrator of the Empire,
    1848.]

    [Footnote 88: Prince Augustus of Saxe-Coburg and Princess
    Clementine of Orleans were married in the following April.
    Prince Ferdinand of Bulgaria is their son.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S STEAM YACHT]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _22nd September 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave, with reference to your Majesty's note of yesterday, to state
to your Majesty that the _first_ act of Sir Robert Peel on his return
from Scotland was to write to Lord Haddington[89] and strongly urge
upon the Admiralty the necessity of providing a steam yacht for your
Majesty's accommodation.

Sir Robert Peel trusts that your Majesty may entirely depend upon
being enabled to make any excursions your Majesty may resolve upon
in the early part of next summer, in a steam vessel belonging to
your Majesty, and suitable in every respect for your Majesty's
accommodation.

Sir Robert Peel has had a personal communication with Sir John
Barrow,[90] one of the Secretaries to the Admiralty, this morning,
upon the subject, and Sir Robert Peel has written by this post to Sir
George Cockburn,[91] who is out of town.

He finds that the Admiralty is now building a large vessel to be
worked by steam power, applied by means of a revolving screw instead
of paddles. It may be doubtful whether the same degree of velocity
can be attained by means of the screw, particularly in a very large
vessel. Of this a full trial will be made.

Sir John Barrow assures Sir Robert Peel that he has been on board a
steam-boat moved by the screw, and that the working of the engine is
scarcely perceptible; that there is none of the tremulous motion which
accompanies the beats of the paddles, and that it will be possible to
apply an apparatus by means of which the smoke can be consumed, and
the disagreeable smell in great measure prevented.

Sir Robert Peel will leave nothing undone to ensure your Majesty's
comfort and safety in any future naval excursions that your Majesty
may be pleased to make.

    [Footnote 89: First Lord of the Admiralty.]

    [Footnote 90: Barrow had been made second Secretary in 1804
    by Dundas; he was a self-made man, and a most indefatigable
    traveller, writer, and promoter of Arctic exploration.]

    [Footnote 91: Admiral of the Fleet Sir George Cockburn
    (1772-1853), First Naval Lord.]




[Pageheading: QUEEN ISABELLA]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

_27th September 1842._

Lord Aberdeen, with his most humble duty, lays before your Majesty a
letter which he has received from Mr Aston, respecting the marriage
of the Queen of Spain, and which, after what has already passed, may
perhaps cause your Majesty some surprise.

Lord Aberdeen is humbly of opinion that the language hitherto employed
by your Majesty's Government upon this subject ought not to undergo
any change, and that it ought to be treated entirely as a Spanish
question.

Great Britain would naturally regard a marriage with a son of the King
of the French as injurious to Spain and menacing to Europe, but would
probably not feel it necessary to give such an opinion respecting any
other alliance. While this might be plainly stated, and the Spanish
Government exhorted to act according to their own independent view
of the real interests of the country and of the Queen, Lord Aberdeen
would humbly propose that the Regent should be explicitly informed by
Mr Aston that he must not expect to receive any assistance from your
Majesty's Government in promoting a marriage with a Prince of the
Netherlands.

Lord Aberdeen believes that the difficulties in the way of such an
alliance will be found to be very great, and especially that the
religion of the Prince will present an obstacle which in Spain must be
nearly insurmountable.




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE ON SCOTLAND]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _29th September 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has to
acknowledge your Majesty's letter of the 25th inst., which he had the
honour and pleasure of receiving here on the 27th. Lord Melbourne is
well aware how much your Majesty's time must have been occupied by the
number of visitors at the Castle. We are much rejoiced here that your
Majesty saw the Prince and Princess Liechtenstein.[92] The latter is a
great favourite of Lady Beauvale's, to whom she was always very kind,
and who describes her exactly as your Majesty does, as being very
"amiable and unassuming," and though one of the first, if not the
first lady at Vienna, as not at all partaking of the insolence and
hauteur which is by some ascribed to the society of that capital. As
a beauty, she is perhaps upon too large a scale, except for those who
admire women of all shapes and sizes; but her eyes and brow are very
fine, and there is a very peculiarly soft and radiant expression about
them. Lord Melbourne had heard of his Sovereignty, but understands
that his territory is extremely limited. His possessions as a subject
of Austria are worth a good deal more than his German principality.

Lord Melbourne greatly congratulates your Majesty upon the happy
progress and termination of the expedition to Scotland. He is very
glad of three things--that your Majesty returned by sea, in the
steamer, and that the passage was a good one....

The country is indeed most interesting, full of real picturesque
beauty and of historical and poetical associations and recollections.
There is nothing to detract from it, except the very high opinion
that the Scotch themselves entertain of it. Edinburgh is
magnificent--situation, buildings, and all--but the boasting of the
articles in the newspapers respecting it almost inclined one to deny
its superiority. It is also, as your Majesty says, most striking to
contemplate in the Clans the remains of feudal times and institutions.
It is quite as well, however, particularly for Monarchy, that they are
but remains, and that no more of them have been left.

Lord Melbourne thanks your Majesty much for your kind enquiries after
his health. He thinks that he is getting better and stronger than he
has been, and has a notion of trying a little shooting in October.

Lord Melbourne begs to be respectfully remembered to the Prince.

    [Footnote 92: Prince Aloysius Joseph of Liechtenstein
    (1796-1858) and his wife, Princess Françoise-de-Paule,
    Countess Kinsky.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _18th October 1842._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I only received your kind letter yesterday, for
which my best thanks. I am delighted to hear that Louise's cough is
decidedly better, and that upon the whole the dear family are well,
thank God! Certainly where He sees fit to afflict, He gives strength
to bear up!

Louise says Vecto is in great beauty, and the baby magnificent. I wish
you could see Pussy now; she is (_unberufen_) the picture of health,
and has just cut her first eye-tooth, without the slightest suffering.
We are going to Brighton on the 1st of November for a month; it is the
_best_ month _there_ and the _worst here_. I think I _may_ announce
Augusta Cambridge's[93] marriage as certain, as I have just received a
note from the Duke, which is as follows:--

"Being very anxious to communicate to you as soon as possible an event
which concerns deeply my family, I take the liberty of requesting you
to let me know on what day and at what hour I may wait upon you."

I shall see him to-morrow, and report the result to Louise on Friday.

I have just taken leave of poor Esterhazy, who has presented his
letters of recall. He looked wretched, and Lord Aberdeen told me he is
only ill at being obliged to go; he is quite miserable to do so, but
the great gentleman at Johannisberg has most ungraciously refused to
listen to his entreaties to remain, which is very foolish, as they
don't know who to send in his place. I am _very_ sorry to lose him,
he is so amiable and agreeable, and I have known him ever since I can
remember anybody; he is, besides, _equally liked_ and on _equally
good terms_ with _both_ parties _here_, which was of the greatest
importance. It was touching to see him so low and ill and unlike
himself.

The accounts of poor dear Alexandrine's eyes continue _very bad_; she
cannot write at all, or go out, or do anything.

Say everything proper from us to the whole family, and pray believe
me, always, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 93: The Princess Augusta of Cambridge, who was
    married to Frederic William, afterwards Grand Duke of
    Mecklenburg-Strelitz, in the following June.]




[Pageheading: HISTORICAL STUDIES]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _20th October 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave respectfully to acknowledge your Majesty's of the 15th inst.,
which he received here the day before yesterday.

Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear that your Majesty is reading with
the Prince. Hallam's work[94] certainly requires much consideration
and much explanation, but it is a fair, solid, impartial work, formed
upon much thought and much reading. St Simon's[95] is an excellent
work; he has some prejudices, but was a good honest man, and his
book is full of useful information. If your Majesty wishes for a book
relating to what passed from one hundred to two hundred years ago,
Lord Melbourne would strongly recommend the Private Memoirs of the
Lord Chancellor Clarendon (Edward Hyde), not the great work, _The
History of the Rebellion_, though that is well worth reading, but the
_Memoirs_, and Bishop Burnet's History of his own time. The reigns
of Charles II., James II., and the Revolution are very curious in
the latter. During Queen Anne's reign the Bishop was not so much
consulted, and his work is therefore not so interesting. If your
Majesty wishes to turn your attention to more recent events, Professor
Smyth's[96] lectures upon Modern History, and particularly upon
the French Revolution, seem to Lord Melbourne sound, fair, and
comprehensive. Lord Mahon's[97] is also a good work, and gives a good
account of the reigns of George I. and George II. He has been thought
by some in his last volume to have given too favourable a character of
the Chevalier, Charles Edward Stuart.

Lord Melbourne is much touched by what your Majesty says of the
Princess Royal, and the delight and comfort which your Majesty finds
in her, as well as by the whole picture which your Majesty draws of
your domestic happiness. When your Majesty refers to what passed
three years ago, your Majesty may be assured that it is with no small
pleasure that Lord Melbourne recalls any share which he may have had
in that transaction, and congratulates himself as well as your Majesty
and the Prince upon results which have been so fortunate both for
yourselves and for the country. Lord Melbourne ventures to hope that
your Majesty will convey these feelings to the Prince, together with
the assurance of his respectful remembrance.

    [Footnote 94: The _Constitutional History_, published in
    1827.]

    [Footnote 95: Louis Rouffroy, Duc de Saint-Simon, author of
    the celebrated _Mémoires_, published 1829-30.]

    [Footnote 96: William Smyth (1765-1849), Regius Professor of
    Modern History at Cambridge.]

    [Footnote 97: Afterwards fifth Earl Stanhope: the book
    referred to is his _History of England from the Peace of
    Utrecht to the Peace of Versailles_.]




[Pageheading: WALMER CASTLE]


_The Duke of Wellington to Sir Robert Peel._

WALMER CASTLE, _26th October 1842._

MY DEAR PEEL,--Arbuthnot has shown me your letter to him respecting
this house.

Nothing can be more convenient to me than to place it at Her Majesty's
disposition at any time she pleases....

I am only apprehensive that the accommodation in the Castle would
scarcely be sufficient for Her Majesty, the Prince, and the Royal
children, and such suite as must attend....

It is the most delightful sea-residence to be found anywhere,
particularly for children. They can be out all day, on the ramparts
and platforms quite dry, and the beautiful gardens and wood are
enclosed and sheltered from the severe gales of wind. There are good
lodgings at Walmer village and on Walmer beach at no great distance
from the Castle, not above half a mile. Believe me, ever, yours most
sincerely,

WELLINGTON.

If the Queen should send anybody here, I beg that he will write me a
line, that I may have an apartment prepared for him.



[Pageheading: LETTER FROM QUEEN ADELAIDE]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

CANFORD HOUSE, _31st October 1842._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--A thousand thanks for your very kind dear letter
of yesterday with its enclosures, which I have just received. Your
opinion respecting George of Hanover's[98] marriage is quite my own,
and I regret that the King does not seem to be inclined to settle it
and fix a day for the celebration of it. I do not know his reasons
against it, for I have not heard from him for a long, long time. I am
so sorry to find that the accounts of his health are so indifferent,
and fear he is not careful enough.

I am happy to hear that you thought the Cambridge visit went off well,
and that the affianced[99] looked and seemed happy. I hope it will
always be the same, and that the marriage will not be delayed too
long. I always had imagined that the Duke of Cambridge was rich and
would give a fortune to his daughters, but I have lately heard that it
is not the case. I do not know what is the usual marriage portion of
an English Princess given by the country. In Germany those portions
are called _die Prinzessin Teuer_.

We received 25,000 Fl. each when we married, and 10,000 Fl. for our
_trousseaux_ each.

If the young couple are to live in future with the Grand Duke they
will not want any Plate, but if they are to have a separate _ménage_,
then they will want it. I shall find it out by and by. I wonder that
the Duchess likes to part with her fine sapphires. I thought the
turquoises had been intended for Augusta.

I wish you could see the Convent to which I went the other day. The
nuns belong to the Order of the Cistercian _Trappists_. They are not
allowed to speak amongst themselves--what a relief my visit must
have been to them!--and they neither eat meat, nor butter, nor
eggs--nothing but milk, vegetables and rice. They look healthy, and
there were several young rather pretty ones amongst them. One, the
best-looking of them all, Sister Marie Josepha, took me affectionately
by the hand and said, "I hope the air agrees with you here and that
you feel better?" and then she added, "Come again--will you, before
you leave this country again?" She told me that she was born in
Ireland and had a German grandfather. She seemed to be the favourite
amongst them all, for when I bought of their works and asked them to
make up my bill, they called Marie Josepha to summon it up, and she
said to me, "Do not stay for that; we will send you your things with
the bill." Two hours after my visit to them I received my things, with
a wreath of flowers besides as their gift to me; on the paper attached
to it was written, "To the Queen-Dowager, from the Reverend Mother and
her Community."

This old Reverend Mother, the Abbess, was very infirm, and could not
get up from her chair, but she spoke very politely and ladylike to me
in French. She has been forty years in her present _situation_,
and comes from Bretagne. The chaplain of the Convent is also an old
Frenchman, and there are several other French nuns amongst them--one
who had been condemned to be guillotined in the Revolution, and was
set at liberty just at the moment the execution was to have taken
place. I should like to know whether these good nuns resumed again at
once their silence when I left them, or whether they were permitted to
talk over the events of that day.... Your most affectionately devoted
Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 98: Afterwards King George V. of Hanover. He married
    Princess Marie of Saxe-Altenburg, 18th February 1843.]

    [Footnote 99: Princess Augusta of Cambridge. _See_ p. 434.
      (Ch. XI, Footnote 93)]




[Pageheading: LORD MELBOURNE'S ILLNESS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

_1st November 1842._

... Many thanks for your most kind and amiable letter of the 28th,
which I received yesterday. The prospect of the possibility of dearest
Louise's spending some time with us _quite enchants_ us, and I hope
and trust that you will carry your plan into execution. Our plans,
which we only settled last night, are as follows:--the scarlet fever
is on the decrease at Brighton, but not sufficiently so to justify our
going there immediately; so we therefore intend going to Walmer with
the children, but a very reduced suite (as the house is considerably
smaller than Claremont), on the 10th, and to stay there till the 22nd
inst., when we shall go to Brighton and remain there till the 13th of
December. Now if dearest Louise would meet us there then, and
perhaps come back with us here for a little while _then_? Windsor is
_beautiful_ in December.

The news of Lord Melbourne, I am thankful to say, are _excellent_, and
he improves rapidly under Dr Holland's care, but his first seizure was
very alarming.[100] I shall not fail to convey your kind message to
this worthy friend of ours.

I am so pleased at your account of Nemours and poor Hélène.
Tatane[101] is not your favourite, is he?

Lord Douglas's[102] marriage with Princess M. of Baden _is_ settled;
_I_ shall of course treat her as a Princess of Baden--I can't do
otherwise (it is like Aunt Sophie,[103] and Princess M. of Würtemberg
who married Count Neipperg[104])--and him as Lord Douglas, which won't
please him.

I wish Clem's marriage was no longer a secret, now that it _is
settled_, as it is (forgive my saying it) really a fashion in our
family to have these _secrets de la comédie_, when one is almost
forced to tell a lie about what is true. I _own_ I dislike these
secrets; it was so with poor Marie and with Vecto. Now _adieu!_
dearest, kindest Uncle, and believe me, always, your most affectionate
Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 100: He had a paralytic seizure, and never regained
    his former health or spirits.]

    [Footnote 101: Duc de Montpensier.]

    [Footnote 102: Afterwards eleventh Duke of Hamilton: he was
    married to Princess Mary on 23rd February following.]

    [Footnote 103: Sister of the Duchess of Kent and of the King
    of the Belgians, and the wife of Count Mensdorff.]

    [Footnote 104: Alfred, Count Neipperg, who died in 1865.]




[Pageheading: THE CROWN JEWELS]

[Pageheading: PROVISION FOR PRINCESS AUGUSTA]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _11th November 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to acquaint your Majesty that he brought under the consideration
of your Majesty's servants the questions relating to certain of
the Crown Jewels, and the claim upon them preferred by the King of
Hanover.[105]

In the course of the discussion it appeared to Sir Robert Peel that
there were still some points in respect to this very embarrassing
question which required the grave consideration of legal authorities,
and that it would not be prudent to take any step, even that of
submitting the case to arbitration, without the highest legal
authority.

The submission to arbitration might avoid the evil (and a very great
one it would be) of public controversy in a Court of Justice, and of
public examination of members of the Royal Family on a matter partly
of a domestic nature; but on the other hand, great care must be taken
that by submitting the case to the award of arbitrators, even should
they be nominated altogether by your Majesty, we do not relinquish any
_fair_ advantage for the Crown of England which would have accompanied
an appeal to the regularly constituted tribunals of the country.

Your Majesty's Solicitor-General was employed as Counsel for the King
of Hanover, and it has been thought therefore advisable to make the
reference to the Attorney-General and to the Queen's Advocate.

Sir Robert Peel has attempted to bring every questionable point in the
case submitted to them under the consideration of your Majesty's law
advisers, and when their report shall be received he will not fail to
lay it before your Majesty.

Sir Robert Peel had a personal interview a few days since with His
Royal Highness the Duke of Cambridge, on the subject of a
public provision for the Princess Augusta on the occasion of her
marriage.[106]

Sir Robert Peel thought it advisable to enquire from the Duke of
Cambridge, as the impression of the public (of which His Royal
Highness is quite aware) is that he has a considerable fortune of his
own, independently of his annual allowance from Parliament.

The Duke of Cambridge seemed entirely to share the impressions of
Sir Robert Peel that in the present state of the country, and of the
public revenue, great caution is requisite in respect to the proposal
of a grant of public money as a marriage portion to the Princess
Augusta, and that it would be important that in any proposal to be
made there should be a general acquiescence on the part of the House
of Commons.

As the marriage is not to take place for some time it appears to Sir
Robert Peel that it might be advisable to postpone a decision, at
least in respect to the particular amount of any provision to be made,
till a period nearer to the meeting of Parliament.

A public intimation, or the public notoriety long beforehand of the
intention to propose a grant of public money might, in the present
temper of the times, interpose additional obstacles in the way of it.

Sir Robert Peel proposes to return to Drayton Manor for a short time,
and to leave London to-morrow morning.

    [Footnote 105: The King claimed them on the ground that part
    belonged to the Crown of Hanover, and part had been bequeathed
    to him by Queen Charlotte. The matter was referred to a
    Commission consisting of Lords Lyndhurst and Langdale, and
    Chief Justice Tindal. The two former were divided in opinion,
    and the Chief Justice died before the award was made. It was
    not till 1857 that a final decision, substantially in favour
    of Hanover, was given.]

    [Footnote 106: See _ante_, p. 437.
      (Ch XI, Footnote 99, 31st October, 1842)]




[Pageheading: SUCCESSES IN CHINA]


_Lord Stanley to Queen Victoria._

DOWNING STREET, _23rd November 1842._

Lord Stanley, with his humble duty, has the honour of submitting to
your Majesty an original despatch from Lieutenant-General Sir Hugh
Gough, received this morning, detailing the triumphant successes which
had crowned the exertions of your Majesty's Naval and Military forces
in China,[107] and of the completely satisfactory result in the
execution of a Treaty of Peace with the Emperor of China, upon terms
highly honourable to your Majesty and advantageous to this country.

Lord Stanley learns from Lord Fitzgerald that he is also forwarding to
your Majesty, by this messenger, the details which the same mail
has brought of the complete and triumphant issue of the campaign in
Afghanistan.

Lord Stanley trusts that he may be permitted to offer to your Majesty
his humble congratulations upon intelligence so glorious to British
Arms, and so important to British interests. It is difficult to
estimate the moral effect which these victories may produce, not
on Asia merely, but throughout Europe also. At the same moment your
Majesty has brought to a triumphant issue two gigantic operations,
one in the centre of Asia, the other in the heart of the hitherto
unapproachable Chinese Empire. In the former, past disasters have
been retrieved; a signal victory has been achieved on the very spot
memorable for former failure and massacre; the honour of the British
Arms has been signally vindicated; the interests of humanity have been
consulted by the rescue of the whole of the prisoners; and, after a
series of victories, the Governor-General of India is free, without
discredit, to enter upon measures of internal improvement, and having
established the supremacy of British power, to carry on henceforth a
more pacific policy.

In China a termination has been put to the effusion of blood by the
signature of a treaty which has placed your Majesty's dominions on a
footing never recognised in favour of any foreign Power--a footing
of perfect equality with the Chinese Empire; which has obtained large
indemnity for the past, and ample security for the future, and which
has opened to British enterprise the commerce of China to an extent
which it is almost impossible to anticipate. It may interest your
Majesty to hear that already enquiries are made in the City for
superintendents of ships to trade to _Ningpo direct_.

Lord Stanley has taken upon himself to give orders in your Majesty's
name for firing the Park and Tower guns in honour of these glorious
successes. A _Gazette_ extraordinary will be published to-morrow, the
voluminous nature of the despatches rendering it necessary to take
some time lest an important despatch should be omitted.

All which is humbly submitted by your Majesty's most dutiful Servant
and Subject,

STANLEY.

    [Footnote 107: Chapoo was taken by Sir Hugh Gough in May: in
    June the squadron, under Admiral William Parker, entered the
    waters of the Yang-tze, captured Chin-kiang-fu, and were about
    to attack Nanking, when the treaty was concluded, embracing
    among other things a payment by the Chinese of 21,000,000
    dollars, the cession of Hong Kong, and the opening of the
    ports of Canton, Amoy, Foochow, Ningpo, and Shanghai.]




[Pageheading: VICTORIES IN AFGHANISTAN]


_Lord Fitzgerald and Vesci to Queen Victoria._

INDIA BOARD, _23rd November 1842._[108]

Lord Fitzgerald, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave
most humbly to inform your Majesty that the despatches received from
the Governor-General of India announce the results of a series of most
brilliant exploits by the armies under Major-General Nott and General
Pollock in Afghanistan.

Each of those armies has achieved a glorious victory over superior
numbers of the enemy.

The city of Ghuznee has been captured, and its formidable fortress
utterly razed and destroyed.

The survivors of the British garrison, which had capitulated in the
spring of the year, and who had been reduced to slavery, have been
redeemed from bondage.

The splendid victory of General Pollock has been obtained over the
army commanded by Akbar Khan in person, on the very spot where the
greatest disaster had befallen the British Army on their retreat, and
where the last gun had been lost.

On the 16th of September, General Pollock entered Cabul with his
victorious troops and planted the Colours of your Majesty in the Bala
Hissar, on the spot most conspicuous from the city.

An extract from a letter from General Pollock to Lord Ellenborough,
dated at Cabul the 21st of September, gives the most gratifying
intelligence that _all_ the British prisoners, with the exception of
Captain Bygrave, have been rescued from Akbar Khan, and were expected
in the British camp on the 22nd of September.

An extract from a letter from General Pollock announcing the
redemption of the prisoners is also most humbly submitted to your
Majesty, by your Majesty's most dutiful Subject and Servant,

FITZGERALD AND VESCI.

    [Footnote 108: The mail, which informed Ministers of the Chinese
    success, also brought the news of the capture of Cabul. General
    Nott (see _ante_, p. 402 (Ch XI, 'Sale and Pollock')) had by the
    end of July completed his preparations, and marched upon Ghuznee,
    having arranged to meet Pollock at Cabul, and having transferred
    the Scinde command to General England. Nott was before Ghuznee
    on 5th September, but at daylight on the 6th found it evacuated;
    the citadel was destroyed by him and the Gates of Somnauth
    removed, as directed by Lord Ellenborough. Pollock, to whose
    discretion Ellenborough had entrusted the policy of advancing on
    Cabul, secured supplies at Gundamuck, and on his advance met the
    enemy in a strong position in the Jugdulluck Pass and dispersed
    them; then at Tezeen, on 12th September, he was attacked by Akbar
    Khan with 20,000 men. The Pass was forced, and the Afghans
    retired to the Haft Kotal, where they were utterly defeated,
    close to the scene of Elphinstone's disaster. Nott arrived at
    Cabul on the day after Pollock.]




[Pageheading: AFFAIRS OF PORTUGAL]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

ARDENNE, _24th November 1842._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--... I do not think, or I may say I am pretty
certain, because I have often seen Donna Maria's letters, they hardly
ever speak of politics, except just saying that they are surrounded by
such very sad people without honour or honesty. I am sure they are
not French at Lisbon beyond the kindly feelings which result from the
recollection of Donna Maria's stay at Paris. My constant advice has
been to look exclusively to the closest alliance with England, and
Ferdinand is now _well aware_ of it; but you know that the Liberal
party tried to even harm him by representing him as a _mere_ creature
of England. We live in odd times when really one very often thinks
people mad; their _uncontrouled_ passions do not develop
amiable feelings, but on the contrary everything that is bad and
unreasonable....

You are a very affectionate and kind Mamma, which is very
praiseworthy; may Heaven preserve your dear little children! Victoria
is very clever, and it will give you great pleasure to see the
development which takes place with children just at that time of life.
What you say of Ernest is unfortunately but too true; that trick of
exaggeration is one of the worst I almost know, and particularly in
people in high stations, as one finally knows not what to believe,
and it generally ends with people disbelieving all such individuals do
say.... Your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WALMER CASTLE, _25th November 1842._

The Queen wishes Sir Robert to consider, and at an _early_ period to
submit to her, his propositions as to how to recompense and how
to mark her high approbation of the admirable conduct of all those
meritorious persons who have by their strenuous endeavour, brought
about the recent brilliant successes in China and Afghanistan.




[Pageheading: MILITARY HONOURS]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WALMER CASTLE, _29th November 1842._

Approve of the G.C.B. given to--

  Sir H. POTTINGER.
  Sir W. PARKER.
  GENERAL NOTT.
  GENERAL POLLOCK.

Likewise of the proposed pension to Sir R. Sale, and the Baronetcy to
Sir Hugh Gough.

Thinks the latter very fit to succeed Sir Jasper Nicols[109] as
Commander-in-Chief in India.

Grants with pleasure the permission _to her troops_ engaged
in Afghanistan to accept and wear the four medals which the
Governor-General has had struck for the Indian Army, and hopes that
besides gratifying the troops, it will have the beneficial effect of
still further strengthening the good feeling existing between the two
armies. Were it not for this impression, the Queen would have thought
it more becoming that she herself should have rewarded her troops with
a medal than leaving it to the Governor-General.

    [Footnote 109: Lieut.-General Sir Jasper Nicols (1778-1849),
    created a K.C.B. for his services at Bhurtpore.]




[Pageheading: THE GATES OF SOMNAUTH]


_Lord Ellenborough to Queen Victoria._

SIMLA, _18th October 1842._

Lord Ellenborough, with his most humble duty to your Majesty, humbly
offers to your Majesty his congratulation on the entire success which
has attended the operations of the Fleet and Army under your Majesty's
direction in the Yantze-Kiang,[110] and submits to your Majesty
the general order which, on the receipt of the intelligence of that
success and of the peace concluded with the Emperor of China upon the
terms dictated by your Majesty, he issued to the Army of India.

Your Majesty will have observed that in the letter of the 4th of July
to Major-General Nott, that officer was instructed to bring away the
gates of the Temple of Somnauth, from the tomb of Mahmood of Ghuznee,
and the club of Mahmood also.

The club was no longer upon the tomb, and it seems to be doubtful
whether it was taken away by some person of Lord Keane's Army in 1839,
or by Shah Sooja, or whether it was hidden in order to prevent its
being taken away at that time.

The gates of the Temple of Somnauth have been brought away by
Major-General Nott.

These gates were taken to Ghuznee by Sultan Mahmood in the year 1024.
The tradition of the Invasion of India by Sultan Mahmood in that year,
and of the carrying away of the gates after the destruction of the
Temple, is still current in every part of India, and known to every
one. So earnest is the desire of the Hindoos and of all who are not
Mussulmans to recover the gates of the Temple, that when ten or twelve
years ago Runjeet Singh was making arrangements with Shah Sooja for
assisting him in the endeavour to recover his throne,[111] he wished
to make a stipulation that when Shah Sooja recovered his power he
should restore the gates to India, and Shah Sooja refused.

Lord Ellenborough transmits for your Majesty's information a copy of
the Address he intends to publish on announcing that the gates of the
Temple will be restored.[112]

The progress of the gates from Ferozepore to Somnauth will be one
great national triumph, and their restoration to India will endear the
Government to the whole people.[113]

    [Footnote 110: See _ante_, p. 441, note 107.
      (Ch. XI, 'Successes in China')]

    [Footnote 111: See _ante_, p. 142. (Intro Note to Ch. VIII)]

    [Footnote 112: "The insult of 800 years," he wrote in this
    rather theatrical proclamation, "is at last avenged. The
    gates of the temple of Somnauth, so long the memorial of your
    humiliation, are become the proudest record of your national
    glory.... You will yourselves, with all honour, transmit the
    gates of sandal-wood, through your respective territories, to
    the restored Temple of Somnauth."]

    [Footnote 113: See _post_, pp. 463, 468, and 477.
    (Ch. XII, Footnote 13; 10th March, 1843; 19th February, 1843)]




[Pageheading: FRANCE AND SPAIN]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _13th December 1842._

DEAREST UNCLE,--I have to thank you for two most kind letters of the
5th and 8th. I can report very favourably of the healths of young and
old; we are all very flourishing, and have since yesterday perfectly
_May_ weather. Clear, dry frost would be wholesome.

Victoire gave me yesterday a much better account of poor little
Robert.[114]

In Portugal affairs seem quieted down, but Ferdinand is imprudent
enough to say to Mamma that he would be wretched to lose Dietz (very
naturally), and _would not be at all sorry to go away_. Now, this is
_folly_, and a most dangerous language to hold, as if he entertains
this, I fear the Portuguese will _some beau matin_ indulge him in his
wishes.

The news from Spain are better, but I must own frankly to you, that
_we are all disgusted_ at the _French intrigues_ which have _without
a doubt_ been at the bottom of it all, and can, I fear, be traced
very close to the Tuileries. Why attempt to ruin a country (which they
luckily _cannot succeed_ in) merely out of personal dislike to a man
who certainly has proved himself capable of keeping the country quiet,
and certainly is by far the _most honest_ Spaniard in existence,
whatever crimes or faults the French may choose to bring against him.
And what will be the effect of all this? A total dislike and mistrust
of France, and a still closer alliance with England. I have spoken
thus freely, as a repetition of last year's scenes is _too much_ to
remain silent, and as I have ever been privileged to tell you, dearest
Uncle, my feelings, and the truth.

Poor Lord Hill's death, though fully expected, will grieve you, as it
has grieved us.

I am much amused at what you say about Charles, and shall tell it him,
when I write to him. Believe me, always, your most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 114: The infant Duc de Chartres.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _19th December 1842._

The Queen is very desirous that something should be done for Major
Malcolm[115] (who was the bearer of "the news of Victory and Peace"),
either by promotion in the Army or by any other distinction. He is a
very intelligent and well-informed officer, and has been employed
in China both in a Civil and Military capacity, and has made, and is
going to make again, a long journey at a very bad time of the year,
though suffering severely at this moment from ague.

    [Footnote 115: In such cases it has been usual to confer some
    distinction.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th December 1842._

The Queen thanks Sir Robert for his letter of the 23rd. She thinks
that Major Malcolm's going back to China the bearer of verbal
instructions as well as written ones will greatly facilitate the
matter and prevent misunderstandings, which at such a great distance
are mostly fatal. The Queen joins in Sir Robert's opinion, that before
coming to a final arrangement it will be most valuable to have Sir H.
Pottinger's opinion upon your present message, and thinks it much
the best that Sir H. should in the meantime be entrusted with
the _extraordinary_ full powers for concluding any provisional
arrangements, as she believes that very great confidence may be placed
in him. Lord Stanley's suggestions strike the Queen as very judicious
and calculated to facilitate the future Government of Hong-Kong.

The Queen hopes to hear more from Sir Robert when she sees him here,
which she hopes to do from Monday the 2nd to Wednesday the 4th.




[Pageheading: THE SCOTCH CHURCH]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

DRAYTON MANOR, _26th December 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and with
reference to enquiries made by your Majesty when Sir Robert Peel
was last at Windsor, on the subject of the Scotch Church and the
proceedings of the last General Assembly, begs leave to acquaint your
Majesty that the Moderator of the Assembly has recently addressed a
letter to Sir Robert Peel, requiring an answer to the demands urged by
the General Assembly in a document entitled a Protest and Declaration
of Right.[116]

The demands of the General Assembly amount to a reversal by Law of the
recent decisions of the Court of Session and of the House of Lords,
and to a repeal of the Act of Queen Anne, which establishes the Right
of Patronage in respect to Livings in the Church of Scotland.

That Act by no means gives any such absolute right of appointment
to the Crown or other patrons of Livings, as exists in England. It
enables those legally entitled to the patronage to present a clergyman
to the Living, but the Church Courts have the power, on valid
objections being made and duly sustained by the parishioners, to set
aside the presentation of the patron, and to require from him a new
nomination.

The Church, however, requires the absolute repeal of the Act of Anne.

An answer to the demands of the Church will now become requisite.

Sir James Graham has been in communication with the law advisers of
your Majesty in Scotland upon the legal questions involved in this
matter, and will shortly send for your Majesty's consideration the
draft of a proposed answer to the General Assembly.[117]

    [Footnote 116: The famous Auchterarder case had decided that,
    notwithstanding the vetoing by the congregation of the nominee
    of the patron, the Presbytery must take him on trial if
    qualified by life, learning, and doctrine,--in other words,
    that the Act of Anne, subjecting the power of the Presbytery
    to the control of the law courts, was not superseded by the
    Veto Act, a declaration made by the General Assembly. In the
    Strathbogie case, a minister had been nominated to Marnock,
    and 261 out of 300 heads of families had objected to him. The
    General Assembly having directed the Presbytery to reject him,
    the civil court held that he must be taken on trial. Seven
    members of the Presbytery obeyed the civil power, and the
    General Assembly, on the motion of Dr Chalmers, deposed them
    and declared their parishes vacant.]

    [Footnote 117: Sir James Graham's letter is printed in the
    Annual Register for 1843. A petition in answer was drawn by
    the Assembly and presented to Parliament by Mr Fox Maule.
    After the debate on it in the Commons, preparations were
    made throughout Scotland for the secession of the
    non-intrusionists, as they were called, which event took
    place on 18th May 1843, when about 500 Ministers, headed by
    Chalmers, seceded from the Old Kirk, and founded the Free
    Church.]




[Pageheading: A SERIOUS CRISIS]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

DRAYTON MANOR, _30th December 1842._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and rejoices
to hear that your Majesty approved of the letter which, with your
Majesty's sanction, James Graham proposes to write to the Moderator of
the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

Sir Robert Peel fears that there is too much ground for the
apprehensions expressed by your Majesty in respect to future
embarrassment arising out of the position of the Church Question in
Scotland.

Sir Robert Peel saw yesterday a letter addressed by Dr
Abercrombie,[118] the eminent physician in Edinburgh, to Sir George
Sinclair,[119] declaring his conviction that the Secession of
Ministers from their Livings would take place to _a very great
extent_--would comprise very many of the Ministers most distinguished
for learning and professional character, and would meet with very
general support among their congregations.

Sir Robert Peel has little doubt that a serious crisis in the History
of the Church of Scotland is at hand, and that the result of it will
be greatly to be lamented; but still he could not advise your Majesty
to seek to avert it by the acquiescence in demands amounting to the
abrogation of important civil rights and to the establishment
in Scotland of an ecclesiastical domination independent of all
control....

He is very confident that your Majesty will feel that in the present
state of the controversy with the Church of Scotland, there is
peculiar reason for taking the greatest care that every minister
presented to a Crown Living should be not only above exception, but
should, if possible, be pre-eminently distinguished for his fitness
for a pastoral charge.

    [Footnote 118: John Abercrombie (1780-1844), one of the chief
    consulting physicians in Scotland, and a great medical writer.
    He left the Established Church.]

    [Footnote 119: Sir George Sinclair (1790-1868), M.P. for
    Caithness-shire, was a supporter of the Anti-Patronage
    Society, and joined the Free Church.]




[Pageheading: HISTORICAL READING]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _30th December 1842._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has been
much delighted this morning by receiving your Majesty's letter of
the 28th. He was the more gratified, as he had begun to be a little
annoyed at being such a very long time without hearing from your
Majesty.

Lord Mahon has sent Lord Melbourne his book.[120] Lord Melbourne has
not yet read it, but he has read the review of it in the _Quarterly_,
which seems to be a sort of abstract or abridgment of the book.
The effect of writing it in French has naturally been to direct all
attention and criticism from the merits of the work to the faults of
the French. People who have read the work speak of it as entertaining,
and the times are curious and interesting. The characters engaged in
them, striking and remarkable. Lord Melbourne is very glad to hear
that Pottinger's conduct is so universally approved. He always
appeared to Lord Melbourne to be a man of great ability, resolution
and discretion, and Lord Melbourne much rejoices that he has turned
out so.

Hallam's opinions Lord Melbourne believes to be in general sound,
and such as have been held and approved by the most able and
constitutional statesmen in this country.

Lord Melbourne is much rejoiced to hear of the Princess and the Prince
of Wales, and also that your Majesty is pursuing your studies quietly,
cheerfully, and happily.

Lord Melbourne is very sensible of the interest which the Baron takes
in his health and which he warmly reciprocates. There is no man whom
he esteems more, nor of whose head and heart he has a better opinion.

We expect here to-morrow the Duchess of Sutherland[121] and Lady
Elizabeth Gower,[122] who have been kind enough to propose to pay Lord
Melbourne a visit.

    [Footnote 120: _Essai sur la vie du grand Condé_, afterwards
    published in English.]

    [Footnote 121: Formerly Mistress of the Robes.]

    [Footnote 122: Afterwards Duchess of Argyll.]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER XII


Repeated debates took place during the year (1843) on the Corn Laws,
the agitation against them steadily growing, Mr Cobden coming on one
occasion into violent conflict with the Premier. The events of
the previous year in Afghanistan were also the subject of constant
discussion in Parliament. A movement of some importance took place in
Wales in opposition to the increasing number of toll-bars, bands
of rioters dressed in women's clothes and known as "Rebecca and her
daughters," demolishing the gates and committing acts of greater or
less violence. A verse in Genesis (xxiv. 60) fancifully applied gave
rise to this name and disguise.

In Scotland the system of private patronage in the Established Kirk
had become very unpopular, the Act of Anne in favour of the nomination
by lay patrons, and the control given to the Law Courts over the
revising action of the Presbytery being ultimately modified by a
declaration of the General Assembly known as the Veto Act. But it
was decided in what was called the Strathbogie case that the veto was
illusory, the disruption of the old Kirk followed, and on 18th May Dr
Chalmers and five hundred other ministers seceded from it in order to
form the Free Church.

In Ireland the agitation for Repeal was at its height. O'Connell,
supported by the _Nation_ newspaper, founded a Repeal Association in
Dublin, and monster meetings were held on Sundays on some conspicuous
spot of free and historic associations to claim the re-establishment
of a Parliament on College Green. It was believed that a quarter of
a million people were present on one occasion, and the Government,
alarmed at the absolute power wielded by O'Connell over these huge
bodies of men, resolved to prohibit the meetings, and somewhat tardily
issued a Proclamation against that announced for Clontarf on 8th
October. O'Connell accordingly disbanded the meeting, but his action
did not please his more zealous supporters, and his ascendency came
to an end. The agitation collapsed and the principal actors were
arrested.

A military duel fought in the summer of this year, in which a colonel
in the Army was shot by his brother-in-law, made the code of honour
existing on the subject a burning question, the criminal law of
homicide being the same then as now. On Prince Albert's suggestion,
the question was taken up by the heads of the Army and Navy, and the
Articles of War were in the following year amended so as to admit of
an apology and a tender of redress.

The better feeling existing between this country and France enabled
the Queen and Prince to visit Louis Philippe at the Château d'Eu.




CHAPTER XII

1843




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _4th January 1843._

DEAREST UNCLE,--... We have been _very_ gay; danced into the New Year,
and again _last_ night, and were _very_ merry, though but a very
small party; young and old danced. Good Lord Melbourne was here from
Saturday till this morning, looking very well, and I _almost_ fancied
happy old times were returned; but alas! the dream is _past_! He
enquired much after you.

Now adieu! Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.




[Pageheading: BETROTHAL OF PRINCE DE JOINVILLE]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _10th January 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I am happy to write to you again from this so very
dear and comfortable old place, where you will have heard from Louise
that we arrived with our dear Pussy on Thursday last. We are _all_
so particularly well, including Pussy, that we intend, to my great
delight, to prolong our stay till next Monday. This place has a
peculiar charm for us both, and to me it brings back recollections
of the _happiest_ days of my otherwise _dull_ childhood--where I
experienced such kindness from you, dearest Uncle, which has ever
since continued. It is true that my _last_ stay here _before_ I came
to the Throne, from November '36 to February '37, was a peculiarly
painful and disagreeable one, but somehow or other, I do _not_ think
of those times, but only of all the former _so_ happy ones. Victoria
plays with my old bricks, etc., and I think you would be pleased to
see this and to see her _running_ and jumping in the flower garden, as
_old_--though I fear _still little_--_Victoria of former days_ used
to do. She is very well, and such an amusement to us, that I can't
bear to move without her; she is _so_ funny and speaks so well, and in
French also, she knows almost everything; she would therefore get on
famously with Charlotte....

Might I ask you some questions about Joinville's match,[1] which
interests me much? First of all, _have_ you heard of his arrival at
Rio? Secondly, if the Donna Francesca pleases, is he empowered _at
once to make the demand_, or must he write home first? How nice it
would be if the _two_ marriages could take place at _once_; but I
suppose, under any circumstances, that could _not_ be....

Alexandrine is nearly quite recovered; she writes such pretty,
affectionate, kind letters, poor dear child, and is so fond of Ernest.
I must say I think _he_ seems improved, as he likes to live _quietly_
with her, and speaks of her too with the greatest affection.

Now, my dearest Uncle, let me take my leave, begging you to believe
me, always, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 1: He was married to the Princess Francesca of
    Brazil on 1st May.]




[Pageheading: HISTORICAL READING]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _12th January 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
your Majesty much for your letter of the 9th inst. which he received
yesterday. Every letter that he receives from your Majesty brings back
to his mind the recollection of times, which, though they were clouded
with much care and anxiety, were still to Lord Melbourne a period of
much happiness and satisfaction....

Hallam has not written a History of the Church, but in all his books
there is necessarily much about the Church, and much that is worthy of
mention. A short History of the Church is, Lord Melbourne fears, not
to be found, the subject is so large and so difficult that it cannot
be treated shortly. Dr Short[2] has written and published a clever,
brief, and distinct summary, but it relates principally to the Church
of England, and in order to be fully understood, requires to be read
by one who has already some acquaintance with the subject.

The book which your Majesty remembers Lord Melbourne reading is
the production of Dr Waddington,[3] whom your Majesty, under Lord
Melbourne's recommendation, made Dean of Durham, which dignity he now
holds. It is a very good book.

Adolphus's[4] History is by no means a bad book, and will give your
Majesty the facts of the beginning of the reign of George III. well
and accurately enough. The Duke of Sussex once told Lord Melbourne
that he had asked his father whether Adolphus's account of the
beginning of his reign was correct, and that the King had replied that
substantially it was so, but that there were some mistakes, and that
what had been done by one person was often attributed to another.
Adolphus's History will receive some illustration from Horace
Walpole's letters of that period....

Lord Melbourne thinks that he is really getting rid of the gout, and
gathering strength. He still has some doubt whether he shall be able
to go up for the meeting of Parliament. Lord Melbourne begs to renew
to your Majesty the warm and respectful assurance of his gratitude and
attachment.

    [Footnote 2: Bishop, then of Sodor and Man, afterwards of St
    Asaph. His book, a _Sketch of the History of the Church of
    England_, was published in 1832.]

    [Footnote 3: George Waddington (1793-1869), Dean of Durham,
    published in 1833 the _History of the Church from the Earliest
    Ages to the Reformation_.]

    [Footnote 4: John Adolphus, barrister, wrote a history of
    England from 1760 to 1783.]




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

CANFORD HOUSE, _Friday, 13th January 1843._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--... As you take so kind an interest in our
dear Thesy,[5] I send you a letter which I have received from her
mother-in-law, with an excellent account of her and her infant. Her
happiness is a great blessing, and I thank God that she is so well
this time. Can you imagine her with _two boys_? It seems so odd, for
it is but a short time since she was here with us. How time flies
rapidly. I own I was not a little surprised to find that you are
probably the godmother; or is the little boy only to be named after
you? I remember well what you said to me when I was asked to be the
godmother of the first boy, "_that I could not accept it_," as I
must not take the responsibilities attached to a sponsor with a Roman
Catholic child. On that ground alone, and having learned your opinion
which sanctioned my own, I refused it then at the risk of offending
the dear parents. Now, after all that was said on the subject, if _you
have accepted_ the offer of becoming sponsor to this little _Victor_,
YOU, as the Head of the English Church, give to understand that _I_
was wrong in my notions of the duties which our Church imposes upon
sponsors, having refused what you accepted. I tell you fairly
and openly that it has vexed me, but of course I say this only to
_yourself_, dearest Victoria, and not to any one else, for it does not
become me to find fault with what you please to do. But I could not
entirely pass it over in silence, and regret that my former refusal
must now become doubly annoying to my relations. I beg your pardon for
thus frankly stating my feelings to you on a subject which I shall
now despatch from my mind, and I trust you will not take it ill,
and excuse me for having mentioned it to you _alone_.... Your most
attached and devoted Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

    [Footnote 5: Princess Thérèse, daughter of the Prince of
    Hohenlohe-Schillingsfurst, and wife of Prince Frederick
    Charles of Hohenlohe-Waldenburg.]




_Queen Victoria to Queen Adelaide._

CLAREMONT, _15th January 1843._

I am at a loss to comprehend, my dear Aunt, what you mean by saying
that you refused being godmother to Thesy's first child, as _I_ had
sanctioned your doing so. I never remember even _talking_ to _you_ on
the subject, but only heard from Mamma that _you_ had refused doing
so--which I was surprised at. I therefore felt no hesitation in
accepting the offer of Thesy, particularly as I am already godmother
to one of the children of Prince Esterhazy's daughter. I am grieved,
dearest Aunt, that this occurrence should annoy you, but I can
_assure_ you that I do not remember _ever_ having spoken to you on the
subject at all.




[Pageheading: GOVERNOR-GENERALSHIP OF CANADA]


_Lord Stanley to Queen Victoria._

DOWNING STREET, _19th January 1843._

Lord Stanley, with his humble duty, submits to your Majesty that in
pursuance of the permission which your Majesty was pleased to give
him personally, he has this day offered to Sir Charles Metcalfe[6] the
Governor-Generalship of Canada; and Lord Stanley has much satisfaction
in adding that the offer has been readily and thankfully accepted.
This appointment, Lord Stanley is convinced, is, under the
circumstances, the best which could have been made, and he believes
not only that it will be generally approved, but that Sir Charles
Metcalfe's long experience and tried discretion will afford the best
prospect of conducting the affairs of Canada safely and successfully
through the present crisis. As Sir Charles Metcalfe will naturally be
anxious previous to his embarkation (which, however, will probably
not take place for at least six weeks) to have the honour of being
presented to your Majesty on his appointment, Lord Stanley hopes he
may be honoured by your Majesty's commands as to the time when it may
be your Majesty's pleasure to admit him to an audience. Perhaps Sir
Charles's attendance after the Council at which your Majesty's Speech
on the opening of the Session has to be settled, may give your Majesty
as little trouble as any time that could be named.

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's most, dutiful Servant
and Subject,

STANLEY.

    [Footnote 6: Metcalfe had had a long Indian career, and for
    a year had been Provisional Governor-General, when he removed
    the restrictions on the liberty of the Press. He was created a
    peer in 1845, but never took his seat. He resigned his post at
    the end of that year, and died soon after.]




[Pageheading: ASSASSINATION OF MR DRUMMOND]


_Sir Robert Peel to the Prince Albert._

WHITEHALL, _20th January (1843)._

SIR,--I have the painful duty of acquainting your Royal Highness that
Mr Drummond, my Private Secretary, was shot at this day about quarter
past three o'clock, in the neighbourhood of Charing Cross.[7]

Two pistols were discharged, the first close to Mr Drummond's back,
the second after the assassin had been seized by a policeman.

The ball entered in the back and has been extracted, after passing
round the ribs. I have just left Mr Drummond's house. No vital part
appears to have been injured, and there is no unfavourable symptom
whatever.

The assassin gives his name _MacNaghten_, and appears to be a Glasgow
man.

Two five-pound notes were, I understand, found upon his person, and
a receipt for £750 given to Daniel MacNaghten, confirming, therefore,
the man's account of his name.

We have not hitherto been able to discover that this man had any
alleged grievance or complaint against the Treasury or any public
office.

He has been loitering about the public offices for the last fortnight,
and being questioned, I understand, some days since, by the Office
Keeper of the Council office, said he was a policeman. This, of
course, for the purpose of evading further enquiry.

The policeman who apprehended the man, says that he heard the man
exclaim after firing the shots: "He or she (the policeman is uncertain
which) shall not disturb my peace of mind any more."

These are all the particulars I have heard or learned. I am afraid
I have given them to your Royal Highness in a hurried manner. I have
thought it better to convey this information to Her Majesty, through
the kind intervention of your Royal Highness, than by a direct
communication to the Queen.

I have the honour to be, Sir, with sincere respect, your Royal
Highness's most faithful and humble Servant,

ROBERT PEEL.

    [Footnote 7: Edward Drummond had been Private Secretary to
    Canning, Ripon, and Wellington, as well as to Peel, and was
    very popular; he was in his fifty-first year. He had just left
    his uncle's Bank at Charing Cross, when he was shot.]




[Pageheading: MISTAKEN FOR SIR ROBERT PEEL]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _21st January 1843._

Sir Robert Peel begs leave to mention to your Majesty a fact _which
has not hitherto transpired_--and of which he was not aware until he
had an interview this morning with Sir James Graham.

On the Inspector Tierney going into the cell of MacNaghten this
morning, he said to MacNaghten: "I suppose you are aware who is the
person whom you have shot?"

He (MacNaghten) said: "Yes--Sir Robert Peel."

From this it would appear that he had mistaken Mr Drummond for Sir
Robert Peel.

The Magistrate thought it better not to have this evidence at present
placed on record.




[Pageheading: DEATH OF MR DRUMMOND]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _25th January 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has the
very painful duty to report to your Majesty the fatal consequences of
the attack on Mr Drummond.

He breathed his last this morning about half-past ten o'clock.

A very unfavourable change took place last night, and no hopes were
entertained after seven o'clock in the evening.

This sad event has had such an effect on Lady Peel, and all the
circumstances attending it are so distressing to Sir Robert Peel, that
relying upon your Majesty's great kindness, he ventures to express a
hope that your Majesty will have the goodness to permit Sir Robert and
Lady Peel to remain for the present in London, or should your Majesty
desire to see Sir Robert Peel before Wednesday next, to allow him to
wait upon your Majesty in the morning of any day which your Majesty
may be pleased to name.

He need scarcely assure your Majesty that nothing but such a sad event
as that which has occurred would induce him to prefer this request to
your Majesty.

Sir Robert Peel encloses such further information as has reached him
respecting MacNaghten.

He does not hesitate to send to your Majesty every word of information
of the least importance which he receives....

The evidence of his mental delusion is strong, but it must be borne in
mind that he was exactly the instrument which others would employ.

Sir Robert Peel has no reason for surmising this to be the case, but
the possibility of it ought not and shall not be overlooked.




[Pageheading: DEMEANOUR OF MACNAGHTEN]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _25th January 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and makes no
apology for frequently writing to your Majesty on the painful subject
in respect to which your Majesty has manifested so deep an interest.

Sir Robert Peel humbly thinks that your Majesty's observations with
respect to the clear distinctions in the cases of insanity are most
just. It will be most unfortunate indeed if the Law does not attach
its severest penalty to a crime so premeditated and so deliberately
and savagely perpetrated, as that of MacNaghten.

The Jury are, however, the sole judges on this point, that is to say,
it rests with them exclusively, either to find an absolute verdict of
guilty of murder, or to acquit on the ground of insanity.

MacNaghten will be charged with the offence of murder, and every
effort will be made to bring him to condign punishment.

His counsel will probably endeavour to establish his insanity.

Nothing can be more collected and intelligent in many respects than
his conduct in prison. He was conversing with the gaoler, and seemed
not disinclined to unburden his mind, when he suddenly stopped and
enquired from the gaoler whether such conversations as that which he
was holding went beyond the prison walls.

On being informed that no security could be given that they would
remain secret, he said he should hold his tongue, but that all would
come out by and by.

Sir Robert Peel takes the liberty of enclosing for your Majesty's
perusal a note which he has just received from Miss Emily Eden, sister
of Lord Auckland, and of Mrs Charles Drummond.

If it should be in your Majesty's power to assign apartments at some
future period to Miss Drummond, who lived with her brother Edward, and
was mainly dependent upon him, it would be a very great comfort to a
lady of the most unexceptionable conduct, and most deeply attached to
her poor brother.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _25th January 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has been
much gratified this morning by receiving your Majesty's letter of the
23rd; he has determined upon following your Majesty's advice, and upon
not hazarding the throwing himself back by coming up to London and
attempting to attend the House of Lords at the commencement of the
Session. The assassination of Mr Drummond, for Lord Melbourne fears it
must be called so, is indeed a dreadful thing. Lord Melbourne is
not surprised, for people are very apt to turn all their wrath and
indignation upon the man from whom they actually receive an answer
which they do not like, without in the least considering whether he
is really responsible for it. Lord Melbourne used often to be himself
assailed with threats of personal violence. Sometimes he took notice
of them by swearing the peace against those who used them, and having
them bound over in sureties. Sometimes he disregarded them, but he
does not think it either prudent or justifiable entirely to neglect
such intimations. Lord Melbourne does not wonder that this event
brings to your Majesty's recollection what has taken place in your own
case.

Hallam is, in Lord Melbourne's opinion, right about Ireland. Her
advocates are very loud in their outcry, but she has not really much
to complain of.

Lord Melbourne was very glad to hear of the marriage of Prince
Augustus of Coburg with the Princess Clémentine, as he apprehends that
the connection must be very agreeable to your Majesty.

Lord Melbourne begs to be respectfully and affectionately remembered
to His Royal Highness.




[Pageheading: COMMITTAL OF MACNAGHTEN]


_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _28th January 1843._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty, begs to inform your Majesty, that
the prisoner Daniel MacNaghten was fully committed for trial this
afternoon. He was not defended before the Magistrates; but in his
manner he was quite cool, intelligent, and collected; he asked no
questions, but he expressed a wish to have copies of the Depositions.

His trial will probably commence on Friday or Saturday next, and there
is reason to believe that, at the request of his relatives in Glasgow,
counsel will be retained, and that the plea of insanity will be raised
in his defence.[8]

Every preparation is in progress to meet this vague and dangerous
excuse. It will turn out that the pistols were bought at Paisley by
MacNaghten on the 6th of August last; and information has reached
Sir James Graham, which, he thinks, will prove that MacNaghten is a
Chartist, that he has attended political meetings at Glasgow, and
that he has taken a violent part in politics. He yesterday saw a
Presbyterian clergyman, who prayed with him; who pointed out the
atrocity of his crime, the innocence of his victim, the pangs
of sorrowing relatives, and who exhorted him to contrition and
repentance. Some impression was made at the moment; but his general
demeanour is marked by cold reserve and hardness of heart.

    [Footnote 8: He was defended by four counsel, including Mr
    Cockburn, afterwards Lord Chief Justice.]




[Pageheading: THE ROYAL FAMILY AND POLITICS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _2nd February 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
much for the letter of the 30th ult., which he received here yesterday
morning. He believes it is more prudent not to go to London, but he
greatly regrets that his not doing so will deprive him for so long a
time of the honour and pleasure of seeing your Majesty.

The Duke of Sussex acquainted Lord Melbourne and took his opinion
before he issued his cards for the dinner. Lord Melbourne does not
think that he can have any idea of playing the part to which Lord
Erroll alluded. It is better that a dinner should be given somewhere.
He having nothing of the kind would look too much like giving up
the whole business and disbanding the party. Lord Melbourne entirely
agrees with your Majesty as to the political conduct which ought to be
pursued by the members of the Royal Family, but he remembers no time
in which they have been induced to act with so much prudence and
propriety. Your Majesty will see in Adolphus the very prominent share
which the Duke of Cumberland,[9] the General of Culloden, took in the
Party contentions of those days. He was a strong partisan and in a
great measure the founder of the Whig party. Lord Melbourne has often
heard George IV. converse upon that subject, and he used to contend
that it was quite impossible for a Prince of Wales in this country to
avoid taking an active part in politics and political contentions. The
fact is, that George III. did not discourage this in his own family
sufficiently, and the King of Hanover always said that his father had
encouraged him in the active part which he took, and which certainly
was sufficiently objectionable.

The assassination of Drummond is indeed a horrible event. Lord
Melbourne does not see as yet any clear, distinct, and certain
evidence of what were the real motives and object of the man. But we
shall hear upon his trial what it is that he urges. Your Majesty will,
of course, recollect that the Jury acquitted Oxford, and there then
was nothing to do but to acquiesce in the verdict. If the Jury should
take a similar view of this man's crime, it will be impossible for
the Government to do anything to remedy the evil which Lord Melbourne
thinks will be caused by such a decision. Lord Melbourne knew Mr
Drummond pretty well. He used formerly to be much in Hertfordshire,
both at Hatfield and at Gorhambury, and Lord Melbourne has often met
him at both places, and thought him with all the rest of the world, a
very quiet, gentlemanly, and agreeable man. Lord Melbourne very well
remembers the murder of Mr Perceval and Bellingham's trial. Lord
Melbourne was then in the House of Commons, but was not present at the
time the crime was perpetrated. There were differences of opinion as
to the manner in which Sir James Mansfield conducted the trial. Many
thought that he ought to have given more time, which was asked for
on the part of the prisoner, in order to search for evidence at
Liverpool. But the law which he laid down in his charge is certainly
sound, correct, and reasonable. Lord Melbourne is very glad to think
that your Majesty has not to go to the House of Lords to-day.

    [Footnote 9: This Duke died unmarried in 1765, and his nephew,
    the fourth son of Frederick, Prince of Wales, was created Duke
    of Cumberland in 1766. He in his turn died without issue, in
    1790, and in 1799 the fifth son of George III. (afterwards
    King of Hanover) received the same title.]




[Pageheading: THE AMERICAN TREATY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _3rd February 1843._

... Lord Melbourne thinks that the Speech was very well and
judiciously drawn; the only paragraph which he does not like is that
about the American treaty.[10] It betrays too great an anxiety for
peace, and too much fear of war.[11]

    [Footnote 10: See _ante_, pp. 368, 370 (Ch. X, 'The United States').
    The treaty had been negotiated by Lord Ashburton.]

    [Footnote 11: "By the treaty which Her Majesty has concluded
    with the United States of America, and by the adjustment of
    those differences which, from their long continuance, had
    endangered the preservation of peace, Her Majesty trusts
    that the amicable relations of the two countries have been
    confirmed."]




_The Queen of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _6th February 1843._

MY BELOVED VICTORIA,--I am quite of your opinion about balls.
_Nothing_ can change what _cannot change_, and I consider all these
things, which have always been _a bore_ to me, as a matter _of duty_
and not otherwise. The duties of station are to be fulfilled like the
others, and my _first_ and _most pleasant_ duty is to do _all_ that
your Uncle may command or wish. Your Uncle was much _shocked_ by
your answer about _Miss Meyer_,[12] whom he considered of _uncommon
beauty_. He is quite in love with her picture, and is very anxious
to discover who she is. The other pictures of the _book of beauty_
he abandons to you, and they are certainly worthy of a _book of
ugliness_.... Yours most devotedly,

LOUISE.

    [Footnote 12: Eugénie Meyer, step-daughter of Colonel Gurwood,
    C.B., married the first Viscount Esher, Master of the Rolls.
    The Queen had written that she did not admire that style of
    beauty.]




[Pageheading: KING LEOPOLD AND PEEL]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _10th February 1843._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--... I am very much gratified by your having
shown my hasty scrawl to Sir Robert Peel, and that the sincere
expression of a conscientious opinion should have given him pleasure.

It was natural at first that you should _not_ have liked to take him
as your Premier; many circumstances united against him. But I must
say for you and your family, as well as for England, it was a great
blessing that so firm and honourable a man as Peel should have become
the head of your Administration. The State machine breaks often down
in consequence of mistakes made forty and fifty years ago; so it was
in France where even Louis XIV. had already laid the first foundation
for what happened nearly a hundred years afterwards.

I believe, besides, Sir Robert sincerely and warmly attached to you,
and as you say with great truth, _quite above_ mere party feeling.
Poor Lady Peel must be much affected by what has happened.... Your
truly devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _12th February 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
here on Friday last, the 10th, your Majesty's letter of the 8th,
which gave him great pleasure, and for which he gratefully thanks your
Majesty. Lord Melbourne is getting better, and hopes soon to be nearly
as well as he was before this last attack, but he still finds his
left hand and arm and his left leg very much affected, and he does not
recover his appetite, and worse still, he is very sleepless at night,
an evil which he is very little used to, and of which he is very
impatient....

Lord Melbourne adheres to all he said about Lord Ashburton and the
Treaty, but he thinks more fire than otherwise would have taken place
was drawn upon Lord Ashburton by the confident declaration of Stanley
that his appointment was generally approved. The contrary is certainly
the case. There is much of popular objection to him from his American
connection and his supposed strong American interests. Lady Ashburton,
with whom he received a large fortune, is a born American. But he is
supposed to possess much funded property in that country, and to
have almost as strong an interest in its welfare as in that of Great
Britain. With all this behind, it is a bad thing to say that his
appointment was liable to no suspicion or objection. It seems to Lord
Melbourne that what with Ellenborough with the Gates of Ghuznee upon
his shoulders,[13] and Ashburton with the American Treaty round his
neck, the Ministry have nearly as heavy a load upon them as they can
stand up under, and Lord Melbourne would not be surprised if they were
to lighten themselves of one or the other.

    [Footnote 13: The Somnauth Proclamation created a good deal of
    ridicule.]




[Pageheading: POSITION OF THE PRINCE OF WALES]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _13th February 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has just
recollected that in the letter which he wrote yesterday, he omitted
to advert to a part of your Majesty's last to which your Majesty may
expect some answer. He means the part relating to the character and
situation of a Prince of Wales in this country. George IV. was so
conscious of having mixed himself most unrestrainedly in politics,
and of having taken a very general part in opposition to his father's
Government and wishes, that he was naturally anxious to exonerate
himself from blame, and to blame it upon the necessity of his position
rather than upon his own restless and intermeddling disposition. But
Lord Melbourne agrees with your Majesty that his excuse was neither
valid nor justifiable, and Lord Melbourne earnestly hopes that your
Majesty and the Prince may be successful in training and instructing
the young Prince of Wales, and to make him understand correctly his
real position and its duties, and to enable him to withstand the
temptations and seductions with which he will find himself beset, when
he approaches the age of twenty-one. It is true that Sir John made the
observation, which Lord Melbourne mentioned to your Majesty, and which
you now remember correctly. He made it to Sir James Graham, when he
went to talk to him about the offence which William IV. had taken at
the Duchess of Kent's marine excursion; and at the receiving of
royal salutes. Your Majesty was not very long in the situation of
an acknowledged, admitted, and certain Heir Apparent, but still long
enough to be aware of the use which those around you were inclined to
make of that situation and of the petitions and applications which it
naturally produced from others, and therefore to have an idea of the
difficulties of it.

Lord Melbourne heartily wishes your Majesty every success in the
interesting and important task in which you are engaged of forming the
character and disposition of the young Prince.




[Pageheading: DOMESTIC HAPPINESS]


_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

CANFORD HOUSE, _14th February 1843._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--Your delightful letter of Tuesday gave me such
pleasure and satisfaction that I must thank you with all my heart for
it. Your happiness, and your gratitude for that happiness, is most
gratifying to my feelings, having loved you from your infancy almost
as much as if you had been my own child. It is therefore happiness to
me to hear from yourself those expressions to which you gave vent. I
thank God that you have such an excellent husband, so well calculated
to make you happy and to assist you in your arduous duties by his
advice, as well as his help in sharing your troubles. I pray that your
domestic happiness may last uninterruptedly, and that you may enjoy it
through a long, long period of _many, many years_. You cannot say too
much of _yourself_ and dear Albert when you write to me, for it is a
most interesting subject to my heart, I assure you.

What a _shame_ to have put on darling little Victoria a _powdered
wig_! Poor dear child must have looked very strange with it! Did her
brother appear in _einer Allonge-Perücke_?...

I shall hope to follow you to town early next month, and look forward
with great pleasure to seeing you so soon again. Forgive me my
horrible scrawl, and with my best love to dearest Albert, believe
me, ever, my dearest Victoria, your most affectionate and faithfully
devoted Aunt,

ADELAIDE.

Pray tell your dear mother, with my affectionate love, that I will
answer her letter to-morrow.




[Pageheading: INTERCHANGE OF VISITS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _14th February 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Many thanks for your kind letter of the 10th, which
I received on Sunday. I am only a little wee bit distressed at your
writing _on the 10th_, and not taking any notice of the _dearest,
happiest_ day in my life, to which I owe the present _great_ domestic
happiness I now enjoy, and which is much greater than I deserve,
though certainly my Kensington life for the last six or seven years
had been one of great misery and oppression, and I may expect some
little retribution, and, indeed, _after_ my accession, there was a
great deal of worry. Indeed I _am_ grateful for possessing (_really
without_ vanity or flattery or _blindness_) the _most perfect_ being
as a husband in existence, or who ever did exist; and I doubt whether
anybody _ever_ did love or respect another as I do my dear Angel! And
indeed Providence has ever mercifully protected us, through manifold
dangers and trials, and I feel confident will continue to do so, and
then let outward storms and trials and sorrows be sent us, and we can
bear all....

I could not help smiling at the exactitude about Monday the 19th
of June; it is a great happiness to us to think with such certainty
(_D.V._) of your kind visit, which would suit perfectly. _À propos_ of
this, I am anxious to tell you that we are full of hope of paying you
in August a little visit, which last year was in so melancholy a way
interrupted; but we think that for _many_ reasons it would be better
for us to pay you our _first_ visit only at _Ostend_, and not at
Brussels or Laeken; you could lodge us _anywhere_, and we need then
bring but very few people with us--it might also facilitate the
meeting with Albert's good old grandmother, who fears to cross the
sea, and whose great _wish_ is to behold Albert again--and would
not be so difficult (_pour la lère fois_) in many ways. I could,
nevertheless, see Bruges and Ghent from thence by help of the
railroad, and return the same day to Ostend.

What you say about Peel is very just. Good Lord Melbourne is much
better.

I hope soon to hear more about Joinville and Donna Francesca. Now,
ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

We are all very well (_unberufen_) and move, _to our horror_, to town
on Friday.




[Pageheading: COBDEN'S ATTACK ON PEEL]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _18th February (1843)._

(_Saturday morning._)

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to acquaint your Majesty that the debate was brought to a
close this morning about half-past three o'clock. The motion of Lord
Howick[14] was rejected by a large majority, the number being--

  For the Motion            191
  Against it                305
                            ---
  Majority                  114
                            ---

The chief speakers were Mr R. Cobden and Lord John Russell in favour
of the motion, Mr Attwood, Lord Francis Egerton, and Sir Robert Peel
against it.

In the course of the evening there was much excitement and animated
discussion, in consequence of the speech of Mr Cobden, who is the
chief patron of the Anti-Corn Law League.

Mr Cobden with great vehemence of manner observed more than once that
Sir Robert Peel ought to be held _individually responsible_ for the
distress of the country.[15]

Coupling these expressions with the language frequently held at the
meetings of the Anti-Corn Law League, and by the press in connection
with it, Sir Robert Peel in replying to Mr Cobden charged him with
holding language calculated to excite to personal violence.

    [Footnote 14: To go into Committee on the depression of the
    manufacturing industry. The debate turned mainly on the Corn
    Laws.]

    [Footnote 15: To this attack Peel replied with excessive
    warmth, amid the frantic cheering of his party, who almost
    refused to hear Cobden's explanation in reply. Peel, alarmed
    at the fate of Drummond, thought (or affected to think) that
    Cobden was singling him out as a fit object for assassination.
    For years Cobden resented this language of Peel most deeply.
    "Peel's atrocious conduct towards me ought not to be lost
    sight of," he wrote in February 1846. A _rapprochement_ was
    effected by Miss Martineau--see her letter to Peel (Parker,
    vol. iii. p. 330)--and a reference to the matter by Disraeli
    in the House of Commons led to satisfactory explanations on
    both sides.]




_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Lincoln._[16]

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _18th February 1843._

The Queen, immediately on her arrival yesterday, went to look at
the new Chapel, with which she is much pleased, but was extremely
disappointed to find it still in such a backward state. As it is of
the utmost importance to the Queen to be able to _use_ it _very soon_,
she wishes Lord Lincoln would be so good as to hurry on the work as
much as possible; perhaps Lord Lincoln could increase the number of
workmen, as there seemed to her to be very few there yesterday.

    [Footnote 16: Chief Commissioner of Woods and Forests.]




[Pageheading: FANNY BURNEY'S DIARY]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _21st February 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
safely your Majesty's letter of the 18th inst. Lord Melbourne entreats
your Majesty that you never will think for a moment that you can
tire him by questions, or that it can be to him anything but a great
pleasure to answer them. He will be only too happy if any information
that he possesses or can procure can be of the least use or pleasure
to your Majesty. Lord Melbourne conceives that your Majesty must be
surprised at his complaining of sleeplessness. He is much obliged by
the suggestion of the camphor. He mentioned it to the gentleman who
attends him, and he said that it was a very good thing, and certainly
has a soothing and quieting effect, and that in fact there was some
in the draught which Lord Melbourne now takes at night. But Lord
Melbourne has taken to going down to dinner with those who are in the
house, and sitting up afterwards until near twelve o'clock, and since
he has done this he has slept better. We expect the Duke and Duchess
of Bedford for two nights on Wednesday next. Lord and Lady Uxbridge
and Ella and Constance often come over in the morning and eat their
luncheon here, which Lord Melbourne takes very kindly of them. George
Byng[17] came the other morning in a waistcoat of Peel's velveteen.
Lord Strafford brought the whole piece off the manufacturer, and let
George Byng have enough for a waistcoat. It is a dull blue stuff, and
the device and inscription not very clear nor easy to make out.[18]

Adolphus is, as Aberdeen says, too rigidly Tory, but there are plenty
of narratives of the same period, such as Belsham[19] and others, of
whom it may be said with equal truth that they are too Whig....

Lord Melbourne read the _Edinburgh_ on Madame d'Arblay, which is
certainly Macaulay's, but thought it unnecessarily severe upon Queen
Charlotte, and that it did not do her justice, and also that it rather
countenanced too much Miss Burney's dislike to her situation. It
appears to Lord Melbourne that Miss Burney was well enough contented
to live in the Palace and receive her salary, but that she was
surprised and disgusted as soon as she found that she was expected to
give up some part of her time to conform to some rules, and to perform
some duty. Lord Melbourne is sorry to say that he missed the article
on Children's Books,[20] a subject of much importance, and in which he
is much interested.

Lord Melbourne has received the engraving of the Princess, and is
much pleased by it, and returns many thanks. It is very pretty, very
spirited, and as far as Lord Melbourne's recollection, serves him,
very like. Lord Melbourne remains, ever, your Majesty's faithful,
devoted, and attached Servant.

    [Footnote 17: Brother-in-law of Lord Uxbridge, and afterwards
    Earl of Stratford.]

    [Footnote 18: The allusion is to a hoax played on the Premier,
    by a presentation made to him of a piece of the then novel
    fabric, velveteen, stamped with a free-trade design. Peel
    afterwards wrote that he was unaware that the specimen bore
    "any allusion to any matters which are the subject of public
    controversy."]

    [Footnote 19: William Belsham (1752-1827) wrote, in twelve
    volumes, _A History of Great Britain to the Conclusion of the
    Peace of Amiens in 1802_.]

    [Footnote 20: In the _Quarterly Review_, by Lady Eastlake.]




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL (_4th March 1843_). (_Sunday morning._)

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to acquaint your Majesty that the prisoner MacNaghten was
acquitted last night, after a trial which lasted two days, upon the
ground of insanity.

The fuller account of the evidence which Sir Robert Peel has seen is
on the accompanying newspaper.

The only other information which has reached Sir Robert Peel is
contained in a note (enclosed) from Mr Maule, the solicitor to the
Treasury, who conducted the prosecution. The three Judges[21] appear
to have concurred in opinion, that the evidence of insanity was so
strong as to require a verdict of acquittal--and the Chief Justice
advised the Jury to find that verdict without summing up the evidence
or delivering any detailed charge upon the facts of the case and the
law bearing upon them.

It is a lamentable reflection that a man may be at the same time so
insane as to be reckless of his own life and the lives of others, and
to be pronounced free from moral responsibility, and yet capable of
preparing for the commission of murder with the utmost caution and
deliberation, and of taking every step which shall enable him to
commit it with certainty.

    [Footnote 21: Chief Justice Tindal, and Justices Williams and
    Coleridge.]




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _10th March 1843._

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs leave
to acquaint your Majesty that the House of Commons was occupied
last night with the attack upon Lord Ellenborough for the Somnauth
Proclamation.[22]

The motion was made by Mr Vernon Smith.[23] The resolution
proposed condemned the Proclamation as _unwise_, _indecorous_
and _reprehensible_. Mr Vernon Smith was followed by Mr Emerson
Tennent,[24] one of the Secretaries to the Board of Controul.

Mr Macaulay next spoke, and condemned the conduct of Lord Ellenborough
in a speech of great bitterness and great ability.

The motion was negatived by a majority of 242 to 157.

The minority included Lord Ashley, Sir Robert Inglis, and six other
gentlemen, who generally support your Majesty's servants.

The debate was a very animated one, with a strong infusion of Party
zeal.

    [Footnote 22: See _ante_, p. 445. (Ch. XI, 'The Gates of Somnauth')]

    [Footnote 23: Robert Vernon Smith (1800-1873), afterwards
    President of the Board of Control, created Lord Lyveden in
    1859.]

    [Footnote 24: James Emerson (1804-1869), afterwards Sir James
    Emerson Tennent, M.P. for Belfast, author of _Letters from the
    Ægean_, etc.]




[Pageheading: CRIMINAL INSANITY]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _12th March 1843._

The Queen returns the paper of the Lord Chancellor's to Sir Robert
Peel with her best thanks.

The law may be perfect, but how is it that whenever a case for its
application arises, it proves to be of no avail? We have seen the
trials of Oxford and MacNaghten conducted by the ablest lawyers of the
day--Lord Denman, Chief Justice Tindal, and Sir Wm. Follett,[25]--and
_they allow_ and _advise_ the Jury to pronounce the verdict of _Not
Guilty_ on account of _Insanity_,--whilst _everybody_ is morally
_convinced_ that both malefactors were perfectly conscious and aware
of what they did! It appears from this, that the force of the law is
entirely put into the Judge's hands, and that it depends merely upon
his charge whether the law is to be applied or not. Could not the
Legislature lay down that rule which the Lord Chancellor does in
his paper, and which Chief Justice Mansfield did in the case of
Bellingham; and why could not the Judges be _bound_ to interpret the
law in _this_ and _no other_ sense in their charges to the Juries?[26]

    [Footnote 25: Solicitor-General. His health gave way in middle
    life, and he died in 1845.]

    [Footnote 26: In consequence of the manner in which the trial
    terminated, and the feeling excited in the country, the House
    of Lords put certain questions on the subject of criminal
    insanity to the Judges, whose answers have been since
    considered as establishing the law.]




[Pageheading: PRINCESS MARY OF BADEN]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _13th March 1843._

Lord Aberdeen presents his humble duty to your Majesty. In obedience
to your Majesty's commands he has endeavoured to consider the letter
of the Grand Duke of Baden with reference to the position of the
Princess Mary[27] in this country. Lord Aberdeen does not find in the
proceedings of the Conference of Great Powers at Vienna, at Aix
la Chapelle, or at Paris, anything which can materially affect the
question. The great difficulty with respect to the Princess appears
to arise from the fact that in this country the rank and precedence
of every person are regulated and fixed by law. Should your Majesty be
disposed to deviate from the strict observance of this, although
Lord Aberdeen cannot doubt that it would receive a very general
acquiescence, it is still possible that the Princess might be exposed
to occasional disappointment and mortification....

There is a consideration, to which Lord Aberdeen would humbly advert,
which may not altogether be unworthy of your Majesty's notice. Your
Majesty does not wish to encourage alliances of this description;
and although there may be no danger of their frequent occurrence,
it cannot be denied that an additional inducement would exist if
Princesses always retained their own rank in this country.

On the whole, Lord Aberdeen would humbly submit to your Majesty that
the Princess might be received by your Majesty, in the first instance,
with such distinction as was due to her birth--either by a Royal
carriage being sent to bring her to your Majesty's presence, or in any
manner which your Majesty might command--with the understanding that
she should permanently adopt the title and station of her husband.
Your Majesty's favour and protection, afforded to her in this
character will probably realise all the expectations of the Grand
Duke; and, without acknowledging any positive claim or right, your
Majesty would secure the gratitude of the Princess.

    [Footnote 27: The Princess Mary of Baden had recently married
    the Marquis of Douglas, eldest son of the Duke of Hamilton.
    _See_ p. 439. (Ch. XI, 1st November, 1842)]




[Pageheading: THE PRINCE TO HOLD LEVÉES]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _17th March 1843._

The Queen has spoken again to the Prince about the Levées, who has
kindly consented to do what can be of use and convenience to the
Queen. There is one circumstance which must be considered and settled,
and which the Queen omitted to mention to Sir Robert Peel when she saw
him. The chief, indeed the _only_, object of having these Levées, is
to save the Queen the _extreme fatigue_ of the _Presentations_
which would come in such a _mass_ together when the Queen _held them
herself_; the Prince naturally holds the _Levées for_ the Queen, and
_represents her_; could not therefore everybody who was presented
to him be made to understand that this would be tantamount to a
presentation to the Queen herself? There might perhaps be an objection
on the part of people presented to kneel and kiss the Prince's hand.
But this could be obviated by merely having the people named to the
Prince. The inconvenience would be _so great_ if nobody at all could
be presented till late in the season, that something must be devised
to get over this difficulty.




[Pageheading: LEVÉES]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

DOWNING STREET, _18th March 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to submit to your Majesty that should your Majesty determine
that the Prince should hold Levées on behalf of your Majesty, the best
course will be to announce the intention from the Lord Chamberlain's
Office in terms to the following purport:

    "His Royal Highness Prince Albert will, by Her Majesty's
    command, hold a Levée on behalf of Her Majesty on ----

    "It is Her Majesty's pleasure that presentations to the Prince
    at this Levée shall be considered equivalent to presentations
    to the Queen.

    "Addresses to Her Majesty may be presented to Her Majesty
    through the Secretary of State, or may be reserved until Her
    Majesty can hold a Levée in person."

Sir Robert Peel humbly submits to your Majesty that it would not
be advisable to _prohibit_ by notice in the _Gazette_ subsequent
presentations to your Majesty. It will probably answer every purpose
to state that they shall be considered _equivalent_, and when your
Majesty shall hold a Levée it may be then notified at the time that
second presentations are not necessary.

When the Prince shall hold the Levée, it may be made known at the
time, without any formal public notification, that kneeling and the
kissing of hands will not be required.

Sir Robert Peel hopes that the effect of holding these Levées may be
materially to relieve your Majesty, but it is of course difficult to
speak with certainty. He was under the impression that in the reign of
Queen Anne, Prince George had occasionally held Levées on the part
of the Queen during the Queen's indisposition, but on searching the
_Gazette_ of the time he cannot find any record of this.




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

CLAREMONT, _19th March 1843._

The Queen has received Sir Robert's letter, and quite approves of his
suggestions concerning the Levées. The Prince is quite ready to do
whatever may be thought right, and the Queen wishes Sir Robert to
act upon the plan he has laid before her in his letter of yesterday.
Perhaps it would be right before making anything public to consider
the question of Drawing-Rooms likewise, which are of such importance
to the trades-people of London. It would be painful for the Queen to
think that she should be the cause of disappointment and loss to
this class of her subjects, particularly at this moment of commercial
stagnation. The Queen conceives that it would be the right thing that
the same principle laid down for the Levées should be followed with
regard to Drawing-Rooms, the Prince holding them for her. The Queen is
anxious to have soon Sir Robert's opinion upon this subject. The Queen
on looking at the almanac finds that _only_ the _two_ next weeks are
available for these purposes _before_ Easter.




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _27th March 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and hastens
to reply to your Majesty's note of this date.

Sir Robert Peel assures your Majesty that he does not think that there
is the slightest ground for apprehension on the occasion of the Levée,
but Sir Robert Peel will, without the slightest allusion to your
Majesty's communication to him, make personal enquiries into the
police arrangements, and see that every precaution possible shall be
taken.

He begs, however, humbly to assure your Majesty that there never has
reached him any indication of a hostile feeling towards the Prince.
It could only proceed from some person of deranged intellect, and he
thinks it would be almost impossible for such a person to act upon it
on the occasion of a Levée.

It may tend to remove or diminish your Majesty's anxiety to know
that Sir Robert Peel has _walked_ home every night from the House
of Commons, and, notwithstanding frequent menaces and intimations of
danger, he has not met with any obstruction.

He earnestly hopes that your Majesty will dismiss from your mind any
apprehension, and sincerely believes that your Majesty may do so with
entire confidence. But nothing shall be neglected.




[Pageheading: THE COMET]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _28th March 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I had the pleasure of receiving your kind letter of
the 24th, on Sunday. How lucky you are to have seen the comet![28] It
is distinctly _to be seen_ here, and _has been seen_ by many people,
but we have till now looked out in vain for it. We shall, however,
persevere.

We left dear Claremont with great regret, and since our return have
been regaled with regular March winds, which, however, have not kept
me from my daily walks. To-day it is finer again.

It is most kind and good of dearest Albert to hold these Levées for
me, which will be a great relief for hereafter for me. Besides _cela
le met dans sa position_; _he_ and _I_ must be _one_, so that I can
_only be represented_ by _him_. I think this, therefore, a good thing
for that reason also; and God knows, he, dear angel, _deserves_ to be
the _highest_ in _everything_.

Our Consecration went off extremely well, and the Chapel is
delightful, and so convenient. I am sure you will like it.

You will be glad to hear that dear old Eos (who is still at Claremont)
is going on most favourably; they attribute this sudden attack to her
over-eating (she steals whenever she can get anything), living in too
warm rooms, and getting too little exercise since she was in London.
Certainly her wind was _not_ in the _slightest_ degree affected by
her accident, for in the autumn she coursed better than all the other
young dogs, and ran and fetched pheasants, etc., from any distance,
and ran about the very evening she was taken so ill, as if nothing was
the matter. Evidently part of her lungs must be _very_ sound still;
and they say _no one's_ lungs are _quite sound_. She must be well
starved, poor thing, and not allowed to sleep in beds, as she
generally does.

    [Footnote 28: Its appearance gave rise to much discussion
    among astronomers. On the 17th Sir John Herschel saw its
    nucleus from Collingwood in Kent, and on the following night
    a dim nebula only; so it was probably receding with great
    velocity.]




[Pageheading: MELBOURNE ON DIET]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

BROCKET HALL, _2nd April 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He received
yesterday morning your Majesty's letter of the 30th ult., for which
he sincerely thanks your Majesty. Lord Melbourne is delighted to
find that your Majesty was pleased with the bouquet. The daphnes are
neither so numerous nor so fine as they were, but there are still
enough left to make another bouquet, which Lord Melbourne will take
care is sent up by his cart to-morrow, and left at Buckingham Palace.
Lord Melbourne is very much touched and obliged by your Majesty's very
kind advice, which he will try his utmost to follow, as he himself
believes that his health entirely depends upon his keeping up his
stomach in good order and free from derangement. He owns that he is
very incredulous about the unwholesomeness of dry champagne, and
he does not think that the united opinion of the whole College of
Physicians and of Surgeons would persuade him upon these points--he
cannot think that a "Hohenlohe" glass of dry champagne, _i.e._ half a
_schoppen_,[29] can be prejudicial. Lord and Lady Erroll[30] and Lord
Auckland and Miss Eden are coming in the course of the week, and they
would be much surprised not to get a glass of champagne with their
dinner. Lord Melbourne is very glad to learn that the Prince's Levée
did well, and feels that His Royal Highness undertaking this duty must
be a great relief and assistance to your Majesty. Lord Melbourne hopes
to see the Baron here when he comes. The spring still delays and hangs
back, but it rains to-day, which Lord Melbourne hopes will bring it
on.

    [Footnote 29: A _schoppen_ is about a pint; it is the same
    word etymologically as "scoop."]

    [Footnote 30: William George, seventeenth Earl of Erroll,
    married a sister of the first Earl of Munster.]




[Pageheading: THE ROYAL CHILDREN]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _4th April 1843._

DEAREST UNCLE,--Many thanks for your very kind letter of the 31st,
which I received on Sunday, just as our excellent friend Stockmar made
his appearance. He made us very happy by his excellent accounts of
you _all_, including dearest Louise, and the children he says are _so_
grown; Leo being nearly as tall as Louise! _En revanche_ he will, I
hope, tell you how prosperous he found us all; and how surprised
and pleased he was with the children; he also is struck with Albert
junior's likeness to his dearest papa, which everybody is struck with.
Indeed, dearest Uncle, I will venture to say that not only _no Royal
Ménage_ is to be found equal to _ours_, but _no other ménage_ is to
be compared to ours, nor is _any one_ to be compared, take him
altogether, to _my dearest_ Angel!...




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _6th April 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and has this
moment received your Majesty's note.

Sir Robert Peel will immediately make enquiry in the first instance in
respect to the correctness of the report of the dinner. The omission
of the health of the Prince is certainly very strange--it would be
very unusual at any public dinner--but seems quite unaccountable at
a dinner given in connection with the interests of one of the Royal
Theatres.

The toasts are generally prepared not by the chairman of the meeting,
but by a committee; but still the omission of the name of the Prince
ought to have occurred at once to the Duke of Cambridge, and there
cannot be a doubt that he might have rectified, and ought to have
rectified, the omission.

Sir Robert Peel is sure your Majesty will approve of his ascertaining
in the first instance the real facts of the case--whether the report
be a correct one, and if a correct one, who are the parties by whom
the arrangements in respect to the toasts were made.

This being done, Sir Robert Peel will then apply himself to the
execution of your Majesty's wishes, in the manner pointed out by your
Majesty.

He begs humbly to assure your Majesty that he enters most fully into
your Majesty's very natural feelings, and that he shall always have
the greatest pleasure in giving effect to your Majesty's wishes
in matters of this nature, and in proving himself worthy of the
confidence your Majesty is kindly pleased to repose in him.




[Pageheading: THE TOAST OF THE PRINCE]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _6th April 1843._

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, hastens to
make a communication to your Majesty, on the subject of your Majesty's
letter of this morning, which he hopes will remove from your Majesty's
mind any unfavourable impression with regard to the _toasts_ at the
theatrical dinner, or to the conduct of the Duke of Cambridge in
reference to them.

Sir Robert Peel, since he addressed your Majesty, has made enquiry
from Colonel Wood, the member for Brecon, who was present at the
meeting.

In order to have the real statement of the case, Sir Robert Peel
did not mention the object of the enquiry. The following were the
questions and the answers:--

_Q._ What were the toasts at the theatrical dinner last night?

COLONEL WOOD. The first was _The Queen and the Prince_. The Duke said
he thought he could not give the health of the Queen in a manner more
satisfactory than by coupling with the name of Her Majesty that of her
illustrious Consort.

Colonel Wood said that his impression was that the Duke meant to do
that which would be most respectful to the Prince, and that he had
in his mind when he united the name of the Prince with that of your
Majesty, the circumstances of the Prince having recently held the
Levée on behalf of your Majesty.

It might perhaps have been better had His Royal Highness adhered to
the usual custom, and proposed the health of the Prince distinctly and
separately, but he humbly submits to your Majesty that the _intention_
of His Royal Highness must have been to show respect to the Prince.

The reports of public dinners are frequently incorrect, the reporters
being sometimes placed at a great distance from the chairman.




[Pageheading: THE KING OF HANOVER]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _12th April 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and will
not fail to forward by the first opportunity the letter to Lord
Ellenborough which accompanied your Majesty's note.

In consequence of his conversation yesterday morning with Baron
Stockmar, Sir Robert Peel begs to mention to your Majesty that he saw
to-day a private letter from Berlin, which mentioned that the King
of Hanover had apparently abandoned the intention of visiting England
this year, but that on the receipt of some letters from England, which
he suspected to be written for the purpose of discouraging his visit,
the King suddenly changed his intention and wrote a letter to your
Majesty, stating that he had thoughts of such a visit.

It was not stated from whence the letters advising the King to remain
on the Continent had proceeded.

This letter also stated that the King of Hanover proposed to waive
his rank of Sovereign as far as he possibly could on his arrival in
England, and to take his seat in the House of Lords without taking any
part in the proceedings.

It added that the King could not, in any event, be in England before
the latter end of May or beginning of June, and rather hinted that
as his proposed visit was more out of a spirit of contradiction and
impatience of obstacles being thrown in the way of it, than from any
strong wish on his part to come here, he might probably change his
intention and defer his visit, particularly if he should find that
there was no particular impediment in the way of it.




_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _13th April 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to acquaint your Majesty that the Duke of Cambridge having
called on Sir Robert Peel this morning, he took an opportunity of
asking His Royal Highness whether he thought the King of Hanover had
made up his mind to visit England this year.

The Duke's reply was, as nearly as possible, as follows:--

"Oh yes, the King will certainly come, but I can tell you privately he
means to have nothing to do with the House of Lords. He will not
make his appearance there. The King has taken his servants for six
weeks--that is, engaged their attendance upon him for that time.
I know the porter is engaged and the stable servants. The King has
written to Her Majesty. His real object in coming is to arrange his
private papers, which were left in confusion, and to consult Sir Henry
Halford."[31]

This was all that was material that His Royal Highness said.

    [Footnote 31: The eminent physician.]




[Pageheading: THE GATES OF SOMNAUTH]


_Lord Ellenborough to Queen Victoria._

CAMP, DELHI, _19th February 1843._

... The gates of the Temple of Somnauth, which have been escorted to
Delhi by five hundred cavalry of the protected Sikh States, will be
escorted from Delhi to Muttra, and thence to Agra by the same force of
cavalry, furnished by the Rajahs of Bhurtpore and Alwar.[32]

While there has been universally evinced a feeling of gratitude to
the British Government for the consideration shown to the people of
Hindustan in the restoration of these trophies, there has not occurred
a single instance of apparent mortification amongst the Mussulmans.
All consider the restoration of the gates to be a national, not a
religious, triumph. At no place has more satisfaction been expressed
than at Paniput, a town almost exclusively Mussulman, where there
exist the remains of the first mosque built by Sultan Mahmood after he
had destroyed the city and temples of the Hindoos....

    [Footnote 32: See _ante_, p. 445. (Ch. XI, 'The Gates of Somnauth')]




[Pageheading: DEATH OF THE DUKE OF SUSSEX]


_Extract from the Will of his late Royal Highness the Duke of
        Sussex, dated the 11th August 1840[33] (sent at the Queen's
        request by Sir Robert Peel to the Duke of Wellington for his
        advice.)_

"I desire that on my death my body may be opened, and should the
examination present anything useful or interesting to science, I
empower my executors to make it public. And I desire to be buried in
the public cemetery at Kensal Green in the Parish of Harrow, in the
County of Middlesex, and not at Windsor."

    [Footnote 33: The Duke of Sussex died on 21st April of
    erysipelas. His first marriage in 1793 to Lady Augusta Murray,
    daughter of the fourth Earl of Dunmore, was declared void
    under the Royal Marriage Act. Lady Augusta died in 1830; her
    daughter married Sir Thomas Wilde, afterwards Lord Truro. The
    Duke contracted a second marriage with Lady Cecilia Underwood,
    daughter of the Earl of Arran and widow of Sir George Buggin:
    she was created Duchess of Inverness in 1840, with remainder
    to her heirs-male.]




_The Duke of Wellington to Sir Robert Peel._

STRATHFIELDSAYE, _21st April 1843._

MY DEAR PEEL,--I have just now received your letter of this day, and I
return the enclosure in the box. It appears to me that the whole case
must be considered as hanging together; that is, the desire to be
buried at Kensal Green, that of Freemasons to pay Masonic Honours,[34]
that the body of the Duchess of Inverness should be interred near to
his when she dies.

Parties still alive have an interest in the attainment of the two last
objects, which are quite incompatible with the interment of a Prince
of the Blood, a Knight of the Garter, in St George's Chapel at
Windsor.

The Queen's Royal Command might overrule the Duke's desire to be
buried at Kensal Green.[35] Nobody would complain of or contend
against it.

But there will be no end of the complaints of interference by
authority on the part of Freemasons, and of those who will take part
with the Duchess of Inverness: and it is a curious fact that there
are persons in Society who are interested in making out that she was
really married to the Duke.[36] Against this we must observe that it
will be urged that the omission to insist that the interment should
take place in the Collegiate Chapel of St George's, Windsor, and thus
to set aside the will, lowers the Royal Family in the opinion of the
public, and is a concession to Radicalism. But it is my opinion that
the reasons will justify that which will be done in conformity with
the will.

I confess that I don't like to decide upon cases in such haste; and
I cannot consider it necessary that a decision should be made on the
course to be taken in respect to the Duke's funeral, on the morrow of
the day on which he died.

It would be desirable to know the opinion of the Lord Chancellor, the
Archbishop, and others.

I can't think of anything likely to occur, which might alter me: and
I'll abide by that which I have above given.

It will be absolutely necessary to take effective measures for the
preservation of the peace at this funeral at Kensal Green: and
even that the magistrates should superintend the procession of the
Freemasons. Believe me, ever yours most sincerely,

WELLINGTON.

    [Footnote 34: The Duke of Sussex being Grand Master of
    England, and Master of the Lodge of Antiquity.]

    [Footnote 35: The body lay in state at Kensington, and was
    eventually buried, as the Duke had desired, in the Kensal
    Green Cemetery.]

    [Footnote 36: See _ante_, p. 478, note 33 (this Ch., above). The
    marriage took place, by special licence, at Lady Cecilia's house
    in Great Cumberland Place.]




_Queen Adelaide to Queen Victoria._

_22nd April 1843._

MY DEAREST NIECE,--I am just come back and feel very anxious to
know how you are, and beg at the same time to offer to you my most
affectionate condolence on the melancholy event which has taken again
another member of our family from us. Pray do not trouble _yourself_
with answering this note, but let me hear how you feel, and whether
you will like to see me to-morrow or at any time most convenient to
you.

I feel deeply our new loss, which recalls all the previous sad losses
which we have had so forcibly, and I pray that it may not affect you
too much, dearest Victoria, and that you will not suffer from the
shock it must have been to you. I was not in the least aware of the
danger and near approach of the fatal end, and only yesterday began to
feel alarmed by the accounts which I had received.

I have been with the poor Duchess of Inverness on my way to town, and
found her as composed as possible under the sad circumstances, and
full of gratitude to you and all the family for all the kindness which
she had received. I pity her very much. It must be her comfort to have
made the last years of the Duke's life happy, and to have been his
comfort to the last moment.

I wish you good-night, dearest Niece, and beg you to give my best
love to dear Albert, and to believe me most devotedly your most
affectionate Aunt,

ADELAIDE.




[Pageheading: BIRTH OF PRINCESS ALICE]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _16th May 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Your kind and dear letter of the 12th has given
me great pleasure. I am happy to give you still better accounts of
myself.[37] I have been out every day since Saturday, and have resumed
all my usual habits almost (of course resting often on the sofa, and
not having appeared in Society yet), and feel so strong and well; much
better (independent of the nerves) than I have been either time. We
are most thankful for it. The King of Hanover has never said _when_ he
will come, even _now_, but always threatens that he will....

Our little baby, who I really am proud of, for she is so very forward
for her age, is to be called _Alice_, an old English name, and the
other names are to be _Maud_ (another old English name and the same
as Matilda) and _Mary_, as she was born on Aunt Gloucester's birthday.
The Sponsors are to be: The King of Hanover,--Ernestus the Pious; poor
Princess Sophia Matilda,[38] and Feodore, and the christening to be on
the 2nd of June. It will be delightful to see you and dearest Louise
on the 19th of June, God willing.

Are there any news of Joinville's proceedings at Rio?[39] Ever your
devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 37: Princess Alice was born on 25th April.]

    [Footnote 38: Princess Sophia Matilda of Gloucester.]

    [Footnote 39: He married Princess Francesca, sister of the
    Emperor of the Brazils and of Queen Donna Maria.]




[Pageheading: CHRISTENING OF PRINCESS ALICE]


_The Earl of Ripon to Queen Victoria._

INDIA BOARD, _5th June 1843._

Lord Ripon, with his humble duty to your Majesty, begs to inform your
Majesty that despatches have been this day received at the India House
from the Governor-General of India and from the Governor of Bombay,
announcing the successful issue of a battle, on the 24th of March,
between Sir Charles Napier and Meer Shere Mahommed.[40] The forces of
the latter were completely routed, with the loss of all the guns and
several standards.

RIPON.

    [Footnote 40: Sir Charles Napier, who was in command in
    Scinde, defeated the army of the Ameers of Upper and Lower
    Scinde at Meeanee on 17th February, and on the 20th took
    Hyderabad. On the 24th March he attacked the enemy, who were
    posted in a strong position on the banks of a tributary of the
    Indus, and obtained a decisive victory.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CLAREMONT, _6th June 1843._

DEAREST UNCLE,--I received your kind letter on Sunday, and thank
you much for it. I am sorry that you could not take the children to
Ardenne, as nothing is so good for children as _very_ frequent change
of air, and think you do not let the children do so often enough.
Ours do so continually, and are so movable that it gives us no trouble
whatever.

Our christening went off very brilliantly, and I wish you could have
witnessed it; nothing could be more _anständig_, and little _Alice_
behaved extremely well. The _déjeuner_ was served in the Gallery, as
at dear Pussy's christening, and there being a profusion of flowers on
the table, etc., had a beautiful effect.

The King of Hanover arrived _just in time_ to be _too late_. He is
grown very old and excessively thin, and bends a good deal. He is very
gracious, for _him_. Pussy and _Bertie_ (as we call the boy) were
not at all afraid of him, _fortunately_; they appeared after the
_déjeuner_ on Friday, and I wish you could have seen them; they
behaved so beautifully before that great number of people, and I must
say looked _very dear_, all in white, and _very distingués_; they were
much admired.

We came here on Saturday. The news from Ireland continue to be very
alarming. Hoping to hear soon, for _certain_, when you come, believe
me, ever, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

I hope you will _kindly answer_ my letter of _last Tuesday_.




[Pageheading: IRISH AFFAIRS]


_Sir Thomas Fremantle_[41] _to Sir Robert Peel._[42]

HOUSE OF COMMONS, _9th June (1843)._

MY DEAR SIR ROBERT,--The King of Hanover took his seat at twenty
minutes past four. He is now on the Woolsack with the Lord Chancellor,
the Duke of Wellington, and Lord Strangford; no other Peers are in the
House, the time of meeting being five o'clock.

It was not necessary that any other Peers should introduce His
Majesty. He merely produced his writ of summons, and went to the table
to be sworn. I remain, yours sincerely,

THOMAS FREMANTLE.

    [Footnote 41: One of the Secretaries of the Treasury:
    afterwards Lord Cottesloe.]

    [Footnote 42: Forwarded to the Queen by Sir Robert Peel.]




_Sir Robert Peel to the Prince Albert._

WHITEHALL, _11th June 1843._

(_Sunday._)

SIR,--In consequence of the conversation which I had with your Royal
Highness on Thursday last on the subject of Ireland, I beg to mention
to your Royal Highness that the Cabinet met again to-day at Lord
Aberdeen's house.

We had a very long discussion.

The prevailing opinion was that if legislation were proposed,[43] that
legislation should be as effectual as possible; that there would be
no advantage in seeking for new powers unless these powers were
commensurate with the full extent of the mischief to be apprehended.

Foreseeing, however, all the difficulties of procuring such powers,
and the increased excitement which must follow the demand for them,
we were unwilling to come to an immediate decision in favour of
recommending new legislation, and resolved therefore to watch the
course of events for some time longer, continuing precautionary
measures against disturbances of the public peace.

I have not received any material information from Ireland by the post
of this day, nor has Sir James Graham.

I have the honour to be, Sir, with sincere respect, your Royal
Highness's most faithful and humble Servant,

ROBERT PEEL.

    [Footnote 43: In consequence of the Repeal agitation, the
    Ministers had already introduced an Irish Arms Bill, which was
    carried.]




[Pageheading: THE REBECCA RIOTS]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _22nd June 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He was
infinitely obliged to your Majesty for coming into the room the other
evening when he was with the Prince, and very much delighted to have
an opportunity of seeing your Majesty, especially in such good health
and spirits.

Lord Melbourne is very glad that your Majesty has seen _As you Like
It_. It is indeed a most gay, lively, and beautiful play. To see or to
read it is quite like passing an hour or two in a forest of fairyland.
It is so lively, and at the same time so romantic. All depends upon
Rosalind, which was an excellent part of Mrs. Jordan. Jaques is also a
very particular character and difficult to play.

Lord Melbourne feels himself better, but still weak. He does not like
to say much about politics, but he cannot refrain from observing that
they seem to him to have permitted these lawless riotings in South
Wales[44] to go on with success and impunity a great deal too long.
When such things begin nobody can say how far they will go or how
much they will spread. There are many who expect and predict a general
rising against property, and this is invariably the way in which such
things begin.

    [Footnote 44: The agitation against the turnpike system which
    had broken out in South Wales. _See_ Introductory Note, p.
    450. (to Ch. XII)]




_Queen Victoria to Sir James Graham._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _23rd June 1843._

The Queen returns these communications to Sir James Graham, which are
of a very unpleasant nature. The Queen trusts that measures of the
greatest severity will be taken, as well to suppress the revolutionary
spirit as to bring the culprits[45] to immediate trial and punishment.
The Queen thinks this of the greatest importance with respect to the
effect it may have in Ireland, likewise as proving that the Government
is willing to show great forbearance, and to trust to the good sense
of the people; but that if outrages are committed and it is called
upon to act, it is not to be trifled with, but will visit wrong-doers
with the utmost severity.

    [Footnote 45: _I.e._, the Rebecca rioters.]




[Pageheading: MILITARY MEDALS]


_Queen Victoria to Lord Stanley._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _24th June 1843._

The Queen follows Lord Stanley's recommendation to confer the G.C.B.
on Sir Charles Napier with great pleasure, from her high opinion of
his late achievements, and she thinks it might be advisable that some
of the officers who most contributed to the victories of Meeanee and
Hyderabad[46] should receive lower grades of the Bath. The Queen is
much _impressed with the propriety_ of a medal being given to the
troops who fought under Sir Charles Napier, as the armies under Nott,
Pollock, and Sale received such distinctions for actions hardly equal
to those in Scinde.

    [Footnote 46: See _ante_, p. 481. (Ch. XII, 5th June, 1843)]




_Sir James Graham to Queen Victoria._

WHITEHALL, _24th June 1843._

Sir James Graham, with humble duty, begs to lay before your Majesty
the report received from Carmarthen this morning. The Earl of Cawdor
went to Carmarthen this morning.[47]

Every effort will be made to trace this lawless outbreak to its
source, and to bring the principal offenders to justice.

Sir James Graham encloses two Police Reports, which have been received
this morning from Dublin. They would seem to indicate some foreign
interference, and some hope of foreign assistance mingled with this
domestic strife. Several Frenchmen have lately made their appearance
in different parts of Ireland.

The above is humbly submitted by your Majesty's dutiful Subject and
Servant,

J. R. G. GRAHAM.

    [Footnote 47: Lord Cawdor was Lord-Lieutenant of
    Carmarthenshire.]




_Queen Victoria to the Duchess of Norfolk._

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _24th June 1843._

MY DEAR DUCHESS,--The same right which you feel, and which you had
to overcome before you took the final step of tendering your
resignation,[48] has kept me from sooner acknowledging the receipt
of your letter. Under the circumstances which you allude to, it is
incumbent upon me to accept of your resignation, but as you throw out
yourself a hint that it would be agreeable to you sometimes to perform
the duties (which you have hitherto fulfilled), it would give me the
greatest gratification if you would let me continue your name on the
list of my Ladies of the Bedchamber, and sometimes at your convenience
have the pleasure of your society.

I agree with you that for the present your step should not be known,
till I shall have had time to find a successor, and I am pleased to
think that you will take your waitings, which are at present settled.

With the Prince's kind regards to yourself, and mine to the Duke,
believe me, always, yours very affectionately,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 48: Of her position as Bedchamber Woman.]




[Pageheading: DUELLING IN THE ARMY]


_Queen Victoria to the Duke of Wellington_.

(_July 1843._)

The Queen having attentively perused the proposed General Order for
the more efficient repression of the practice of duelling in the
Army, approves of the same, but recommends that the Duke of Wellington
should submit to the Cabinet the propriety of considering of a
general measure applicable to _all branches_ of the Naval and Military
Service.[49]

    [Footnote 49: An influential anti-duelling association had
    been formed this year, and subsequently public attention was
    drawn to the question by a duel on 1st July, at Camden Town,
    in which Colonel Fawcett was shot by his brother-in-law,
    Lieutenant Munro, who had reluctantly gone out, after enduring
    much provocation. Mainly owing to Prince Albert's efforts,
    the Articles of War were so amended as to put a stop to the
    practice.]




[Pageheading: THE SPANISH MARRIAGE]


_The Prince Albert to Lord Aberdeen._

_20th July 1843._

MY DEAR LORD ABERDEEN,--The Queen and myself have been taken much
by surprise by Lord Howard de Walden's despatch marked "most
confidential." The opinions of the Portuguese Court must have entirely
changed. Although we have not heard anything on the subject, we are
fully convinced of the correctness of Lord Howard's statements and of
his conjectures. We are both pleased to see the view which he takes,
and the good opinion he has of our little cousin. The Queen thinks
it right that you should inform Lord Howard that the possibility of a
marriage between Prince Leopold[50] and the Queen of Spain has been
for some time a favourite thought of hers and mine, and that you
thought that this combination had some advantages which hardly any
other could offer. But that the matter had been and was treated here
as one purely and solely Spanish, in which we carefully abstained from
interfering with, and that we leave it to work itself out or not by its
own merit.

That you wished him to take the same view, but not to lose sight
of it, and to report to you whatever he might hear bearing upon the
subject. Believe me, etc.,

ALBERT.

    [Footnote 50: Son of Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, and
    brother of the King of Portugal. See _ante_, p. 378, and
    _post_, p. 486. (Ch. XI, Footnote 11; Ch. XII, 'The Spanish Marriage')]




_Queen Victoria to the Duchess of Norfolk._

DEAR DUCHESS,--I write to inform you that I have named your
successor,[51] who is to be Lady Douro.[52] The great regret
I experience at your leaving me is certainly diminished by the
arrangement which we have agreed upon together, and which will still
afford me the pleasure of having you occasionally about me. I trust
that the Duke's health will admit of your taking your waiting in
September, but think it right to tell you that we shall probably at
that time be making some aquatic excursions in our new yacht, and
consequently be from home the greater part of your waiting.

With the Prince's best regards to yourself, and mine to the Duke,
believe me, always, yours very affectionately,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 51: As Bedchamber Woman.]

    [Footnote 52: Elizabeth, daughter of the eighth Marquis of
    Tweeddale, afterwards Duchess of Wellington. She died in
    1904.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _3rd August 1843._

The Queen returns the enclosed papers, and gives her sanction to the
bringing in of the Bill for Enrolling and Arming the Out-Pensioners
of Chelsea Hospital with great pleasure, as she thinks it a very good
measure at the present crisis, calculated to relieve the troops which
are rather overworked, and to secure a valuable force to the service
of the Government. The Queen hopes that in bringing in the Bill Sir
Robert Peel will make as little of it as possible, in order not to
make it appear a larger measure than it is.

The Regulations strike the Queen as very judicious, and she has little
doubt that they will raise the military spirit in the Pensioners, and
will make the measure popular with them, which cannot fail to attach
them more to the Crown.




_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _13th August 1843._

The Queen is desirous that whatever is right should be done, but is
strongly of opinion that the King of Hanover's threat (for as such
it must be regarded) not to leave this country till the affair[53] is
decided upon, should in _no way_ influence the transaction, as it is
quite immaterial whether the King stays longer here or not.

    [Footnote 53: Of the Crown jewels; _ante_, p. 439.
      (Ch. XI, 'Crown Jewels')]




[Pageheading: THE SPANISH MARRIAGE]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _13th August 1843._

The Queen sees with great regret, in Sir Robert Gordon's despatch of
4th August, that Prince Metternich has resumed his favourite scheme
of a marriage between the Queen of Spain and a son of Don Carlos, and
that King Louis Philippe has almost come to a secret understanding
with him upon that point.[54] The Queen is as much as ever convinced
that instead of tending to pacify Spain _this_ combination cannot fail
to call _new_ principles of discord into action, to excite the hopes
of a lost and vanquished party for revenge and reacquisition of power,
and to carry the civil war into the very interior of the family. The
Queen is anxious (should Lord Aberdeen coincide in this view of
the subject, as she believes he does) that it should be _clearly_
understood by Sir Robert Gordon, and Prince Metternich.

    [Footnote 54: Since the Quadruple Alliance (of England,
    France, Spain, and Portugal) in 1834 to expel Don Carlos and
    Dom Miguel from the Peninsula, the question of the marriage
    of Queen Isabella (then aged four) had been a subject
    of incessant consideration by England and France. The
    Queen-Mother had suggested to Louis Philippe the marriages of
    the Queen to the Duc d'Aumale and of the Infanta (her sister)
    to the Duc de Montpensier: such a proposal, however gratifying
    to the French King's ambition, would naturally not have been
    favourably viewed in England; but Guizot promoted warmly the
    alternative project of a marriage of the Queen to her cousin
    Don Francisco de Asis, Duke of Cadiz, son of Don Francisco de
    Paula, the Infanta being still to marry Montpensier. It was
    believed that, if this marriage of the Queen took place, there
    would be no issue of it, and Louis Philippe's ambition would
    be ultimately gratified. To Palmerston's protest against this
    scheme (before the Melbourne Ministry fell), Guizot replied,
    "_La Reine aura des enfants et ne mourra pas._" The other
    possible candidates for the Queen's hand from the French point
    of view were Count Montemolin, the son of Don Carlos, the
    Count de Trapani, son of Francis I., King of the Two Sicilies,
    and thus brother of Queen Christina, and the Duke of Seville,
    a brother of the Duke of Cadiz. Other candidates also favoured
    by the Queen-Mother were (while he was unmarried) Prince
    Albert's brother, and his cousin Leopold, brother of the King
    of Portugal; but the French King was bent upon a marriage
    of the Queen with some descendant of Philip V., and equally
    determined to prevent the Infanta's marriage either with
    Leopold or any other Prince not a descendant of Philip V. The
    view of Prince Albert and of Lord Aberdeen was that it was a
    matter for the young Queen herself and the Spanish people. See
    _ante_, p. 485. (Ch. XII, 20th July, 1843)]




_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _13th August 1843._

Lord Aberdeen, with his most humble duty, begs to assure your Majesty
that he will not fail to give his best attention to your Majesty's
communication respecting the marriage of the Queen of Spain.

In a recent despatch to Sir Robert Gordon, Lord Aberdeen has repeated
the opinion entertained by your Majesty's Government, that the
marriage of the Queen with the son of Don Carlos, instead of leading
to the conciliation and unison of parties, would be more likely to
produce collision and strife, and to increase the existing animosity
between the different political factions by which Spain is distracted.

This marriage, however, has always been a favourite project with
Austria and the Northern Courts; and it has also been apparently
supported by the French Government. It cannot be denied that at
first sight there are many considerations by which it may seem to be
recommended; but the weight of these can only be duly estimated by the
authorities and people of Spain.

The same may be said respecting the marriage of the Queen with any
other Spanish Prince, a descendant of Philip V. which, in the opinion
of many, would be most agreeable to the feelings and prejudices of
the nation. To this project also it appears that the French Government
have recently assented.

Lord Aberdeen humbly thinks that the interests of this country and of
all Europe are deeply concerned in the exclusion of a French Prince
from the possibility of receiving the hand of the Queen; and that it
would not be a wise policy to oppose any marriage by which this should
be effected, consistently with the free choice of the Queen, and
the sanction of the Spanish Government and people. The avowed
predilections of Queen Christina, and her increased means of influence
recently acquired, render this a matter of considerable anxiety and
importance at the present moment.




[Pageheading: PARLIAMENTARY OBSTRUCTION]


_Queen Victoria to Sir Robert Peel._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _16th August 1843._

The Queen cannot refrain from writing a line to express her
indignation at the very unjustifiable manner in which the minority
of thirteen members obstructs the progress of business.[55] She
hopes that every attempt will be made to put an end to what is really
indecent conduct. Indeed, how is business to go on at all if such
vexatious opposition prevails? At all events, the Queen hopes that
Sir Robert will make _no kind_ of concession to these gentlemen, which
[could] encourage them to go on in the same way.

The Queen forgot to say this morning that she thinks it would be
better that the Investiture of the Thistle should be put off for the
present.

    [Footnote 55: By opposition to the Bill removing doubts as to
    the admission of Ministers in Scotland.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir James Graham._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _22nd August 1843._

The Queen returns these papers to Sir J. Graham, and thinks that this
important Memorial[56] should _not_ be decided on without the opinion
of the House of Lords; the Queen trusts that everything will be done
to secure inviolate the maintenance of the Marriage Act.

    [Footnote 56: The memorial was that of Sir Augustus d'Este
    (1794-1848), the son of the union of the Duke of Sussex and
    Lady Augusta Murray. On 4th April 1793 they were married at
    Rome by an English clergyman, the ceremony being repeated in
    the same year at St George's, Hanover Square. The Court of
    Arches annulled the marriage in 1794, but Sir Augustus now
    preferred a claim to the peerage. Ultimately the Lords, after
    consulting the judges, disallowed it.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

SOUTH STREET, _23rd August 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
your Majesty much for the last note which he had the honour of
receiving. Lord Melbourne is much pleased that your Majesty is glad
of Wilhelmina Stanhope's marriage,[57] and was very glad to hear that
your Majesty had congratulated her and Lady Stanhope upon it,
which was very kind, and gave much satisfaction. Lord Dalmeny is an
excellent young man, and altogether it is an event much to be rejoiced
at, especially as it has been so long delayed, and fears began to
be entertained that it would never happen. The Duke and Duchess of
Sutherland seem also much pleased with Evelyn's[58] marriage. She is a
beautiful girl, and a very nice person in every respect, and everybody
must wish her happy. Lord Melbourne has been at Panshanger for two
or three days with Uxbridge and Lady Uxbridge, Ella, and Constance.
Uxbridge is having continual cricket matches as he used to have, which
is a very good thing, making the country gay, and pleasing the people.

Matrimonial affairs, Lord Melbourne is afraid, remain _in statu quo_.

Lord Melbourne was very glad to hear from Anson yesterday and to learn
that he thinks himself getting better. Lord Liverpool had given Lord
Melbourne a very poor account of him. Lord Melbourne hopes that your
Majesty may have a pleasant tour, but he cannot refrain from earnestly
recommending your Majesty to take care about landing and embarking,
and not to do it in dangerous places and on awkward coasts. Lord
Melbourne is going the day after to-morrow with Lord and Lady Beauvale
to Brocket Hall, and from thence on the 29th to Melbourne, to stay
about three weeks or a month.

Lord Melbourne congratulates your Majesty upon the near approaching
termination of the Session of Parliament, which is always a relief
to all parties. Some great measures have been passed. Lord Melbourne
wishes your Majesty health and happiness, and begs to be respectfully
remembered to the Prince.

    [Footnote 57: To Lord Dalmeny. _En secondes noces_, she
    married the fourth Duke of Cleveland.]

    [Footnote 58: Lady Evelyn Leveson Gower, married, on 4th
    October, to Charles, Lord Blantyre.]




[Pageheading: VISIT TO THE CHÂTEAU D'EU]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

CHÂTEAU D'EU, _4th September 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I write to you from this dear place, where we are
in the midst of this admirable and truly amiable family, and where we
feel quite at home, and as if we were one of them. Our reception by
the dear King and Queen has been most kind, and by the people really
gratifying.[59] Everything is very different to England, particularly
the population. Louise has told you all about our doings, and
therefore tell you nothing but that I am highly interested and amused.
Little Chica (Mdme. Hadjy)[60] is a charming, sprightly, lively
creature, with immense brown eyes. We leave this the day after
to-morrow for Brighton, where the children are, who are extremely
well, I hear. Many thanks, dearest Uncle, for your kind letter of the
29th, by which I see that poor Prince Löwenstein[61] came to see you;
he is Mamma's old friend. As I am in a great hurry, and as I hope, God
willing, to see you very soon, I must conclude in haste, and leave all
my remarks for another day. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Pray forgive this confused and horrid scrawl.


    [Footnote 59: The Queen was enthusiastically received at
    Tréport. On the 2nd there was a great entertainment in
    the banqueting-room of the Château, and on the 4th a _fête
    champêtre_ on the Mont d'Orléans in the forest. On the 5th
    there was a review, and on the 7th the Queen returned to
    England.]

    [Footnote 60: The Princess of Joinville. See _ante_, p. 451.
    (Ch. XII, 10th January, 1843).
    Hadjy is the Prince of Joinville.]

    [Footnote 61: Prince William of Löwenstein (1783-1847).]



[Pageheading: THE FRENCH VISIT]


_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

MELBOURNE, _6th September 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
your Majesty much for your letter of the 27th ult., which he received
here some days ago. We have been quite dismayed and overwhelmed with
the melancholy intelligence of death after death which has followed
us. I was much concerned for poor Charles Howard's loss, but we were
quite struck down by the melancholy event of poor Mrs W. Cowper.[62]
She promised to suit us all well, my sister particularly, and to be a
great source of happiness and comfort.

Your Majesty is quite right in supposing that Lord Melbourne would at
once attribute your Majesty's visit to the Château d'Eu to its right
cause--your Majesty's friendship and affection for the French Royal
Family, and not to any political object. The principal motive now
is to take care that it does not get mixed either in reality or in
appearance with politics, and Lord Melbourne cannot conceal from
your Majesty that he should lament it much if the result of the visit
should turn out to be a treaty upon any European matter, unfavourable
to England and favourable to France. Do not let them make any treaty
or agreement there. It can be done elsewhere just as well, and without
any of the suspicion which is sure to attach to any transaction which
takes place there.

    [Footnote 62: Mr and Mrs William Cowper had only been married
    on 24th June.]




_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _8th September 1843._

MY DEAREST AND MOST BELOVED VICTORIA,--I have been highly gratified
that you found a moment to write me such a dear letter. I am sure that
the personal contact with the family at Eu would interest you, and
at the same time remove some impressions on the subject of the King,
which are really untrue. Particularly the attempt of representing
him like the most astute of men, calculating constantly everything to
deceive people.

His vivacity alone would render such a system extremely difficult,
and if he appears occasionally to speak too much and to seem to hold a
different language to different people, it is a good deal owing to his
vivacity and his anxiety to carry conviction to people's mind.

The impression of your visit will besides do wonders in removing the
silly irritation which had been got up since 1840, and which might
have in the end occasioned serious mischief, and that without being
_in the least_ called for, the passions of nations become very
inconvenient sometimes for their Governors.... Your devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.

My best love to dearest Albert; he seems to have had the greatest
success, and I am very glad of it, as it had some time ago been the
fashion to invent all sorts of nonsense.

I left Stockmar extremely hypochondriacal, but I trust not so unwell
as he fancied. His son accompanies him to Coburg.




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S RETURN]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

ON BOARD THE _Victoria and Albert_, IN THE RIVER,[63]

_21st September 1843._

MY DEARLY BELOVED UNCLE,--I seize the first opportunity of informing
you of our excellent passage; we shall be in half-an-hour or
three-quarters at Woolwich; it is now half-past ten A.M. The day and
night were beautiful, and it is again, very fine to-day. We anchored
in Margate Roads at eleven last night, and set off again about five.

Let me thank you and my beloved Louise in both our names again for
your _great kindness_ to us, which, believe me, we feel _deeply_. We
were _so happy_ with you, and the stay was _so delightful_, but so
painfully short! It was such a joy for me to be once again under the
roof of one who has ever been a father to me! I was _very_ sad after
you left us; it seems so strange that all should be over--but the
_delightful_ souvenir will _ever_ remain. To leave my dearest Louise
too was so painful--and also poor Aunt Julia,[64] so immediately after
making her acquaintance; pray tell her that, for me. I shall write to
Louise to-morrow. You must forgive my hand being so trembling, but we
are _lighter_ than usual, which causes the tremulous motion to be so
much more felt.

That God may bless and protect you _all always_ is our fervent prayer.
Believe me, always, your devoted and grateful Niece and Child,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 63: On the 12th the Queen and Prince Albert sailed
    from Brighton on a visit to King Leopold. They visited Ostend,
    Bruges, Ghent, Brussels, and Antwerp.]

    [Footnote 64: Sister of the Duchess of Kent, married to the
    Grand Duke Constantine.]




_Queen Victoria to Sir James Graham._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _22nd September 1843._

The Queen has received Sir James Graham's letter of the 22nd.[65] She
has long seen with deep concern the lamentable state of turbulence in
South Wales, and has repeatedly urged the necessity of its being put
an end to, by _vigorous_ efforts on the part of the Government. The
Queen, therefore, willingly gives her sanction to the issuing of a
special Commission for the trial of the offenders and to the issuing
of a proclamation. Monday, the 2nd, being the earliest day at which,
Sir James says, the necessary Council could be held, will suit the
Queen very well; she begs, therefore, that Sir James will cause the
Council to meet here on that day at three o'clock.

    [Footnote 65: The insurrection of the Rebeccaites was assuming
    a more dangerous form, and at Hendy Gate they committed a
    cold-blooded act of murder.]




[Pageheading: MATRIMONIAL PROJECTS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _26th September 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I cannot sufficiently thank you for your two _most
kind_ and affectionate letters of the 22nd and 23rd, which gave me the
greatest pleasure. _How often_ we think of our _dear_ and _delightful_
visit it is impossible for me to say; indeed, I fear these _two_
never-to-be-forgotten _voyages_ and _visits_ have made me think
Windsor and its daily occurrences very dull. But this is very
ungrateful for what I have had, which is so much more than I ever
dared to hope for. The weather is become colder, and yesterday and the
day before were horrid, foggy, raw days; to-day it is finer again....

Feodore and Ernest came to us yesterday, and I find them both _very_
well; Feodore is, I think, grown more serious than she was....

You remember that when we were together we talked of who Aumale could
marry; he will only marry a Catholic, and no Spaniard, no Neapolitan,
no Austrian, and also no Brazilian, as Louise tells me. Why should not
Princess Alexandrine of Bavaria do? It would be a good connection, and
you say (though not as pretty as Princess Hildegarde) that she is not
ill-looking. _Qu'en pensez-vous?_ Then for _Tatane_[66]--a Princess of
Saxony would be extremely _passlich_.

How long does Aunt Julia stay with you?

Albert, I suppose, writes to you, and I, dearest Uncle, remain ever
and ever, your _most truly_ devoted and _warmly attached_ Niece,

VICTORIA R.

We find Pussy amazingly advanced in intellect, but alas! also in
naughtiness. I hold up Charlotte as an example of every virtue, which
has its effect; for when she is going to be naughty she says: "Dear
Ma, what does cousin Charlotte do?"

    [Footnote 66: Antoine, Duc de Montpensier.]




[Pageheading: ROYAL VISITORS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _3rd October 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Many, many thanks for your kind letter of the 28th,
received on Sunday, which was written from the Camp of Beverloo, which
Albert recollects with _great pleasure_ and interest, having amused
himself so much there.

I can give you excellent accounts of ourselves. The boy returned from
Brighton yesterday, looking really the picture of health, and
much _embelli_; Pussy is in great force, but not to be compared to
Charlotte in beauty; and Fatima (_alias_ Alice) is as enormous and
flourishing as ever. Dearest Louise seems much pleased with Aunt
Julia, which I am glad of, and I rejoice that poor Aunt has had the
happiness of making my beloved Louise's acquaintance, for it will be a
happy recollection for her in her solitude.

We expect the Grand Duke Michael here this afternoon; he is to stay
till Friday. The Michael Woronzows,[67] with a son and daughter, are
also coming, and we shall be a large party, and are going to dine in
the Waterloo Gallery, which makes a very handsome dining-room, and sit
after dinner in that beautiful grand Reception Room. _How_ I envy
your going to that dear French family! I hope that you will like my
favourite Chica. I trust, however, that you will _not_ stay too long
away for your good people's sake.

Not being quite sure of your going, I shall direct this to Brussels
still.

We went this morning to Kew, visited the old Palace--which is not at
all a bad house--the Botanical Gardens, and then my Aunt's.[68]

The Revolution at Athens[69] looks like _le commencement de la fin_;
it was _very_ unanimous.

Now, dearest Uncle, adieu! Ever, your most affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 67: Prince Michael Woronzow (1782-1856) was a
    plenipotentiary at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (1818), and
    was in command at the siege of Varna in 1828.]

    [Footnote 68: The Duchess of Cambridge.]

    [Footnote 69: A bloodless revolution had taken place on
    the 14th of September, partly in consequence of King Otho
    exercising his patronage in favour of Bavarians rather than
    Greeks. He now acceded to the popular demands.]




[Pageheading: THE DUC DE BORDEAUX]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _9th October 1843._

The Queen has received Lord Aberdeen's two letters. She has been
reflecting upon his proposition that Mr Lytton Bulwer[70] should be
appointed Minister at Madrid, and quite approves it. The Queen trusts
that he will try and keep on the best terms with the French Minister
there, and that without in any way weakening our interests, the
representatives of these two powerful countries will act _together_.
The Queen feels _certain_ that if it is known by _our_ respective
Ministers that _both_ Governments _wish_ to act _together_, and not
_against_ one another, that much irritation will be avoided; and that
our agents, particularly in distant countries, will understand
that they are _not_ fulfilling the wishes of their Sovereign by
representing every little incident in the most unfavourable light....

The Queen hopes that Lord Aberdeen will take some early opportunity of
employing Mr Aston. Who will replace Mr Bulwer at Paris? his successor
ought to be an efficient man, as Lord Cowley[71] is rather infirm. The
Queen regrets to say that the Duc de Bordeaux[72] is coming here; he
really must not be received by the Queen, as she fears his reception
at Berlin has done _no_ good; and altogether, from what she sees in
the papers, she fears there is no good purpose in his coming here.

    [Footnote 70: Afterwards Lord Dalling.]

    [Footnote 71: Lord Cowley, brother of the Duke of Wellington,
    and one of four brothers all either raised in or promoted to
    the peerage, was now seventy years of age. In after-years his
    son was also Ambassador at Paris.]

    [Footnote 72: Afterwards known as Comte de Chambord, and
    claiming the French throne as Henri V.: he was grandson of
    Charles X., and at this time about twenty-three years of age.]




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _13th October 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--It is not my day, but my object in writing is to
speak to you about the _dear_ Nemours' visit, which we are so anxious
to see accomplished. Louise writes to me about the Duke of Bordeaux
coming to England making some difficulty, and I wish therefore to
state what we know of the affair. We _understand_ (for of course
we have had no direct communication) that the Duc de Bordeaux has
embarked at Hamburg for _Hull_, and intends travelling in Scotland
_before_ he visits England, and _that_ incognito and under the name of
Comte _tel et tel_; his being in Scotland when Nemours is in
England, and particularly _on a visit to us here_, _could_ make
_no_ difficulty, and even if he were travelling about _incognito_ in
England, it could not signify, I think. Moreover, I feel certain that
if he knew that _I_ had invited the Nemours and that they were coming
over shortly, he would go away, as the Legitimists would not be
pleased at Nemours being _fêted_ by me--_while their Henry V._ was
_not_ even noticed or received. I could easily, and indeed have almost
done so, make it known generally that _I_ expect the Nemours, and I
would say _immediately_, and he would be sure to get out of the way.
I cannot tell you _how very_ anxious we are to see the Nemours; I have
been thinking of nothing else, and to lose this great pleasure would
be too mortifying. Moreover, as I really and truly do not think it
need be, it would be _best_ if the Nemours could come _before_ the
10th of November; which is the _latest_ term when they could come? Now
pray, dearest Uncle, do settle this for me; you have no notion _how_
we wish it. I will be sure to let you know what I hear, and if there
is anything you could suggest about this, I need not say but that we
shall attend to it with pleasure. The Grand Duke Michael will be gone
by the end of this month. _Ainsi je mets cette chère visite dans vos
mains._ Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

Pray, dearest Uncle, let me have an answer by the next post about
this, as I am all in a _fidget_ about it.




[Pageheading: ARREST OF O'CONNELL]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _17th October 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Your kind letter of the 13th I received yesterday,
and return you my warmest thanks for it....

By your letter, and by one I received from Victoire yesterday morning,
I see every reason to hope that we shall see the dear Nemours,
for there will be no difficulty to prevent that poor stupid Duc de
Bordeaux from being _in London_ at the time. He is to be informed
indirectly that the Nemours are coming at the beginning of next month
on a visit to us, in consequence of a pressing invitation of ours;
this alone will keep him off, as the contrast would be disagreeable to
the Legitimists. Independent of this, his disembarkation at Hull, and
proceeding at once to Scotland, seems to indicate his wish to be in
private.

The great event of the day is O'Connell's arrest;[73] they have found
bail, but the trial will shortly commence. The case against him is
_very_ strong, the lawyers say.

Everything is perfectly quiet at Dublin. You will have seen how
O'Connell has abused the King; it is all because our visit to Eu
has put an end to _any_ hopes of assistance from France, which
he pretended there would be, and he now declares for the Duc de
Bordeaux!...

You must encourage the dear King and Queen to send over some of the
dear family often to us; _ils seront reçus a bras ouverts_....

We intend to take advantage of Feodore and Ernest's going to the Queen
Dowager's to pay a visit to Cambridge, where we have never been; we
mean to set off to-morrow week, to sleep at Trinity Lodge that night,
and the two following nights at Lord Hardwicke's,[74] which is close
to Cambridge. These journeys are very popular, and please and interest
Albert very much.... Believe me, always, my dearest Uncle, your very
affectionate Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 73: After the official prohibition on 7th October
    of the intended Clontarf meeting, O'Connell and others
    were arrested in Dublin for conspiracy. After giving bail,
    O'Connell issued an address to the Irish people. The trial was
    postponed till the following year.]

    [Footnote 74: Wimpole, near Royston, nine miles from
    Cambridge.]




[Pageheading: THE DUC DE BORDEAUX]


_Sir Robert Peel to the Prince Albert._

DRAYTON MANOR, _20th October 1843._

SIR,--The enclosed letter[75] from Sir James Graham to me (which
as your Royal Highness will perceive is _entirely of a private
character_) contains details of a conversation with Baron Neumann
which will, I think, be interesting to Her Majesty and to your
Royal Highness; and knowing your Royal Highness will consider the
communication a confidential one, I prefer sending the letter _in
extenso_ to the making of any extracts from it.

I am afraid there is more in the Duc de Bordeaux's visit than the mere
gratification of a desire on his part to see again places with which
he was familiar in his youth.

If, however, he should be so ill-advised as to make any political
demonstration, or to ally himself with any particular party in this
country, he would, in my opinion, derive little from it, and there
would be the opportunity of giving to the King of the French a new
proof of our fidelity to our engagements, and of the steadiness of our
friendship towards him and his dynasty.

The great body of the French people would comprehend the object of any
such demonstrations on the part of the Duc de Bordeaux, and would, it
is to be hoped, see in them an additional motive for union in support
of the King, and confidence in the honour and integrity of this
country.

I will not fail to inform the Grand Duke of Her Majesty's intended
visit to Cambridge, and to suggest to him that it will not be
convenient to the Queen to receive him at Windsor before Saturday at
the earliest, and probably Monday.

On the day after I spoke to your Royal Highness I gave instructions
for enquiries to be made respecting the two properties in the Isle of
Wight.[76] It is necessary to make such enquiries through some very
confidential channel, as a suspicion of the object of them would
probably greatly enhance the price.

The party on whom I could entirely rely was out of town, but will
return to-morrow, and will immediately find out what he can respecting
the properties.

The result shall be made known to the Queen and your Royal Highness
without delay.

Will your Royal Highness have the goodness to mention this to Her
Majesty?...

I have the honour to be, Sir, with sincere respect, your Royal
Highness's most faithful and humble Servant,

ROBERT PEEL.

    [Footnote 75: Referring to the visit of the Duc de Bordeaux.]

    [Footnote 76: The Queen and the Prince were at this time
    making enquiries about a suitable residence in the Isle of
    Wight. The purchase of Osborne resulted.]




[Pageheading: THE QUEEN'S DECISION]


_The Prince Albert to Sir Robert Peel._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _21st October 1843._

MY DEAR SIR ROBERT,--I return you Sir James Graham's letter. There
is a pretty general impression of the Duc de Bordeaux's visit being
a got-up thing for various political intrigues. I confess I do not
understand the link with Ireland, or at least the importance of his
being well received by the Roman Catholics, but am strongly impressed
that his presence whether in Scotland, England, or Ireland is for
no good, and therefore think it our duty that we should render it
difficult for him to protract it. The Queen and myself think that the
uncertainty of his being received at Court or not is doing harm, and
would _much_ wish, therefore, that it was _decidedly_ stated _that
the Queen will not receive him_. His coming here without ever asking
(indeed knowing that it was disliked), as well as the part which
Austria and Prussia seem to have taken in the matter, do not
strengthen his claim for such a favour. No good can come from the
reception, and the King of the French must prefer its not taking
place. Let us, therefore, settle that point, and show that we are
neither afraid of him nor prepared to be made dupes of.

The Queen is desirous that no official person should treat the Duke
with a distinction which is likely to attract unnecessary attention.
Believe me, always yours truly,

ALBERT.




[Pageheading: THE DUC DE NEMOURS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _24th October 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I had the happiness of receiving your most kind
letter of the 20th yesterday, for which I thank you very much. The
good news of the dear Nemours coming is a great happiness to us, and
I fervently hope and trust that the Duc de Bordeaux will be kept off,
which I _fully_ expect he will. Suppose, however, he could _not_ be,
and the Nemours could not come _then_, would the King not kindly allow
them to come later? Even if the Chambers were to be sitting--such
a little _Ausflug_ of ten days only could really not be a great
inconvenience? Surely if you were to mention this to the dear King,
with my affectionate respects, he would grant it. It is besides only
in _case_ Bordeaux should come to London, which I _really_ think he
will _not_, if he once knows that the Nemours are coming. And I must
add that I think Nemours not coming at _all_ this year, after it had
been announced, would have a bad effect, particularly as people
here think that some great Powers have instigated Bordeaux's coming
here,--and even think that the Roman Catholics and Repealers in
Ireland mean to make use of him. Consequently Nemours _not_ coming _at
all_, should he be prevented from coming at the beginning of November,
would not be a good thing _politically_, independent of the _extreme
disappointment_ it would cause us....

The accounts both you and Louise gave me of good Hadjy and Chica give
me great pleasure, as I take a lively interest in both, and am very
fond of them. We found amongst some very curious old miniatures
several of Catherine of Braganza when young (Charles II.'s wife),
which are so like Chica;[77] it is curious how sometimes you can trace
likenesses many generations back....

Pray offer our respects to _all_. How long do you stay? Ever your
devoted niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 77: The Princess de Joinville was a sister of Queen
    Maria II. of Portugal, and Queen Catherine of Braganza was
    daughter of King John IV.]




[Pageheading: THE DUC DE BORDEAUX]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

DRUMLANRIG, _27th October 1843._

Lord Aberdeen, with his humble duty, begs to lay before your Majesty
another letter received last night from Lord Morton,[78] which gives
an account of the visit of the Duc de Bordeaux, and of his further
communication with the Duc de Lévis on the projects and views of His
Royal Highness.

Lord Aberdeen has ventured to submit this letter to your Majesty,
although not intended for your Majesty's perusal, as it gives a
pleasing and satisfactory description of the conduct and sentiments of
this unfortunate Prince.

In order to explain to your Majesty how Lord Morton, who lives in
a very retired manner, should have received a visit from the Duc
de Bordeaux, Lord Aberdeen begs to mention that when the family of
Charles X. resided at Edinburgh, after the Revolution of July 1830,
they received information more than once, from the present Royal
Family of France, that certain desperate characters had left Paris for
Edinburgh, with the intention of assassinating the Duc de Bordeaux, in
order to prevent all possibility of a Restoration. In consequence of
this information, it was thought to be dangerous for the Prince to
walk or to expose himself in the neighbourhood of Holyrood House. He
was frequently driven in a carriage to Lord Morton's,[79] where he
remained for a few hours, taking exercise in the park, and playing
with Lord Morton's children. It is the recollection of this which has
led the Prince to make his acknowledgments on the present occasion.

Lord Aberdeen also begs humbly to mention to your Majesty that on his
arrival here he found the Duke and Duchess of Buccleuch in expectation
of a visit from the Duc de Bordeaux, on his way from Glasgow
to Carlisle. Lord Aberdeen informed the Duke and Duchess of the
objections which might exist to this visit; but he believes that
communications on the subject had already gone too far to render
it possible to break it off with any degree of propriety. The great
attentions paid by the Duke and his predecessors to the French Royal
Family, both during the former and last emigration, sufficient account
for this desire on the part of the Prince.

    [Footnote 78: George Sholto, nineteenth Earl of Morton
    (1789-1858).]

    [Footnote 79: Dalmahoy, Midlothian.]




[Pageheading: VISIT TO CAMBRIDGE]

[Pageheading: BETROTHAL OF THE DUC D'AUMALE]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _31st October 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I had the pleasure of receiving your dear and kind
letter of the 27th yesterday, by which I learn that you are all well
and going on the 4th. Forgive me, dearest Uncle, if I say that I am
glad that you are _at length_ going back to Belgium, as (though I
fully understand from _personal_ experience how delightful it must be
to be in the midst of that dear and perfect family) I think these long
absences distress your faithful Belgians a little.

We returned on Saturday, highly pleased and interested with our
tour,[80] though a little _done up_. I seldom remember more enthusiasm
than was shown at Cambridge, and in particular by the Undergraduates.
They received my dear Angel, too, with the greatest enthusiasm. This
is useful, as these young people _will all, in time_, have a certain
part to play; they are the rising generation, and an event of this
kind makes a lasting impression on their minds.

You will have heard from Louise that there is no longer any impediment
to the dear Nemours coming, which you may easily conceive gives me the
greatest satisfaction. Since then, I have heard that Bordeaux does not
intend visiting London till he sees by the papers that the Nemours are
gone. I saw a letter from a gentleman, with whom he had been staying,
and who says that he is very pleasing and unaffected, and very easily
amused, and quite pleased "with missing a few pheasants, and dancing
quadrilles in the evening to a pianoforte." Poor fellow! his fate
certainly is a melancholy one. He should renounce, buy some property
in Germany, and marry, and settle there.

I am glad to hear of Montpensier's arrival, and that my favourite
Chica is in your good graces; she is a dear natural child. I am so
impatient to see my dear Victoire and good Nemours--who was always a
great ally of mine--again!

The Grand Duke came here last night, and goes away after luncheon, and
leaves England on Thursday. He is charmed with all he has seen, and I
must say is very amiable and civil. He has got a most charming large
dog, called Dragon, like a Newfoundland, only brown and white, with
the most expressive eyes imaginable and _si bien dressé_. Prince
Alexander of the Netherlands is also coming down to take leave this
week. We never had so many visitors.

I am beyond everything interested with that beautiful novel by
Rellstab,[81] _1812_, which I know you admire so much. The description
of the Russian Campaign is incomparable, and so beautifully written.
You quite _see_ everything before you. Have you read his other, _Paris
und Algier_? By the by, have you read Custine's[82] book on Russia?
They say it is very severe on Russia, and full of hatred to the
English.

We found the children very well, and Bertie quite recovered, but poor
fat Alice (who, I _must_ say, is becoming _very_ pretty) has had the
earache.

Mamma with Feo and Ernest are with the Queen Dowager at Witley Court
since Thursday last, and only return next Thursday (the day after
to-morrow). Clem seems very happy, and writes that she is happiest
when she is _tête-à-tête_ with poor Gusti, which _I_ should _not_
fancy. Ever, dearest Uncle, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

I open my letter, dearest Uncle, to say that I have _just_ seen in a
confidential despatch from Lord Cowley that Aumale is authorised
to ask for the hand of the daughter of the Prince de Salerno[83] (a
singular coincidence after what I wrote to you in _utter ignorance_
of this report), and that he was also to find out what the opinions of
the Neapolitan Royal Family were respecting an alliance with the Queen
of Spain. But tell me, dearest Uncle, if these reports are true? You
may _rely_ on my discretion, and I shall not breathe a word of what
you may answer me, if you wish the secret to be kept.

    [Footnote 80: The Royal party went by road from Paddington
    to Cambridge, and stayed at the Lodge at Trinity; on the
    following day Prince Albert was made LL.D. The party then went
    to Wimpole, and visited Bourn (Lord Delawarr's). At the ball
    which was given at Wimpole, there was a sofa, covered with a
    piece of drapery given by Louis XIV. to the poet Prior and by
    him to Lord Oxford, the owner of Wimpole, before its purchase
    by Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. _See_ Lord Melbourne's letter of
    7th November, _post_, p. 503. (Ch. XII, 7th November, 1843)]

    [Footnote 81: Louis Rellstab (1799-1860), a prolific German
    writer of novels, whose thinly-veiled attacks on public men
    earned him at one time a sentence of imprisonment.]

    [Footnote 82: The Marquis Astolphe de Custine (1790-1857),
    author of _La Russie en 1839_, at this time recently
    published.]

    [Footnote 83: The Due d'Aumale married in November 1844,
    Caroline, daughter of the Prince and Princess of Salerno.]




[Pageheading: INDIAN AFFAIRS]


_Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria._

DRAYTON MANOR, _31st October 1843._

Sir Robert Peel presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and begs
leave to return to your Majesty the accompanying communication from
Lord Ellenborough, and a letter which your Majesty proposes to send to
Lord Ellenborough.

In compliance with your Majesty's desire that Sir Robert Peel should
inform your Majesty whether he sees anything objectionable in that
letter, Sir Robert Peel humbly represents to your Majesty that he does
not think it would be advisable for your Majesty personally to express
to the Governor-General of India your Majesty's opinion with regard
either to the policy of retaining Scinde,[84] as being of the
greatest importance to the security of the Indian Empire, or as to the
completeness of the defence of Sir Charles Napier from the accusations
brought against him.

He humbly and most respectfully takes the liberty of submitting to
your Majesty, that these being matters of important public concern,
the regular and constitutional channel for conveying the opinion of
your Majesty with respect to them would be through your Majesty's
servants.

In the particular case, indeed, of India, instructions do not proceed
from your Majesty's servants, directly signifying your Majesty's
pleasure, but are conveyed in despatches to the Governor-General,
signed by the three members of the Secret Committee of the Court of
Directors.

The Secret Court of Directors--that is, the whole Court acting in
secret--have come to a Resolution (in Sir Robert Peel's opinion very
unwisely and precipitately) expressing the gravest doubt, on their
part, as to the policy and justice of the recent transactions in
Scinde.[85]

The Court is aware that your Majesty's servants disapprove of this
proceeding on their part, and that they have declined to transmit
officially to Lord Ellenborough, through the Secret Committee, the
condemnatory Resolution of the Court. One of the grounds on which they
deprecated the Resolution was the passing of it in the absence of full
and complete information from India, in respect to the policy and to
the events which led to the occupation of Scinde.

Under these circumstances, as well on the general Constitutional
ground, as with reference to the present state of the public
correspondence in regard to Scinde, and the particular relation of
the Governor-General to the East India Company, and the Court of
Directors, Sir Robert Peel humbly advises your Majesty to forbear
from expressing an opinion, in a private communication to the
Governor-General, with regard to events in Scinde or to the policy
hereafter to be pursued in respect to that country. Sir Robert Peel
begs to add that in a private letter by the last mail to Lord Ripon,
Lord Ellenborough observes that he is going on very harmoniously with
the Members of Council at Calcutta.

    [Footnote 84: Earlier in the year Lord Ellenborough had
    appointed Sir Charles Napier Governor of Scinde, and had by
    Proclamation applied the Slave Trade and Slavery Abolition
    Acts to Scinde.]

    [Footnote 85: See Parker's _Sir Robert Peel_, vol. iii. chap. 1.]




_Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria._

MELBOURNE, _7th November 1843._

Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to your Majesty, and thanks
your Majesty much for the letter of the 4th inst., which he has
received this morning with great satisfaction. Lord Melbourne hears
with great pleasure of the gratification which your Majesty and the
Prince received in your visit to Cambridge. Lord Melbourne collects
from all the accounts that the proceedings in the Senate House
were not only full of loyalty, enthusiasm, and gratitude, but also
perfectly decorous, respectful, academic, and free from all those
political cries which have recently prevailed so much in the theatre
at Oxford on similar occasions.[86] Lord Melbourne hopes he is within
[the mark]; if he is it forms a remarkable and advantageous contrast.
Lord Melbourne does not know anywhere a better account of Cambridge,
its foundations, and the historical recollections of its founders,
than is given in Mr. Gray's ode on the installation of the Duke
of Grafton, which it would not be amiss to read with the large
explanatory notes that are given in the editions of Mason and
Mathias.[87]

Lord Melbourne is very partial to Lord Hardwicke, who always is and
has been very civil and good-natured to Lord Melbourne, and these are
qualities to which Lord Melbourne is not at all indifferent. Wimpole
is a curious place. Lord Melbourne is not exactly aware how the Yorkes
got hold of it.[88] There is much history and more poetry connected
with it. Prior[89] mentions it repeatedly, and always calls the first
Lady Harley, the daughter of the Duke of Newcastle, Belphebe.[90] If
Hardwicke should have a daughter, he should christen her Belphebe. The
Lady Belphebe Yorke would not sound ill....

    [Footnote 86: See _ante_, p. 292. (Ch. X, 17th June, 1841)]

    [Footnote 87: Gray, the poet, who had been appointed by the
    Duke Professor of Modern History, composed an ode (set to
    music by Randall) for the latter's installation as Chancellor,
    on 1st July 1769.]

    [Footnote 88: The cultured but indolent Edward, Lord Harley,
    afterwards Earl of Oxford (son of the great minister), sold
    Wimpole to Lord Chancellor Hardwicke in 1740 to pay off a debt
    of £100,000. He had married Lady Henrietta Cavendish Holles,
    daughter and heiress of John, Duke of Newcastle, who brought
    him £500,000, most of which he dissipated. Their only child,
    Margaret, the "noble lovely little Peggy" of Prior, married
    William Bentinck, second Duke of Portland. Lady Oxford sold
    to the nation the "Harleian Collection" of manuscripts, now in
    the British Museum.]

    [Footnote 89: Who died there in 1721.]

    [Footnote 90: Alluding to the rarely printed poem "Colin's
    Mistakes," where "Bright Ca'ndish Holles Harley" is seen in
    the glades of Wimpole by the dreamy youth, and mistaken for
    Gloriana, Belphebe, etc.]




[Pageheading: PROPOSED VISIT TO PEEL]


_Sir Robert Peel to the Prince Albert._

WHITEHALL, _9th November 1843._

SIR,--I was greatly gratified by learning on my return to London last
night from Witley Court that it is not improbable that Her Majesty and
your Royal Highness may confer the high honour of a visit to Drayton
Manor towards the conclusion of the present month.

I venture to think, from what I saw of Witley Court, that the
arrangement proposed by your Royal Highness will be more convenient to
Her Majesty than the staying at Witley Court.

I can assure your Royal Highness that nothing shall be left undone by
Lady Peel and me to contribute to the comfort of Her Majesty and your
Royal Highness during your occupation of Drayton Manor, and to mark
our sense of the kind condescension of Her Majesty and your Royal
Highness in making it your abode.

I have the honour to be, Sir, with sincere respect, your Royal
Highness's most faithful and humble Servant,

ROBERT PEEL.




[Pageheading: TRAVELLING ARRANGEMENTS]


_Sir Robert Peel to the Prince Albert._

WHITEHALL, _Sunday, 12th November 1843._

SIR,--I send to your Royal Highness a little book which is published
every month, giving very useful information as to distances, or at
least times, on all the railways. Possibly your Royal Highness has
this book regularly sent to you.

I think, before Her Majesty promises a visit to Witley Court, there
are one or two points worthy of consideration which are in favour
of proposing to the Queen Dowager to meet the Queen at Drayton Manor
first. The Queen would have to go and to return in the same day. The
Queen Dowager might remain either one night or two nights at Drayton.
Secondly, the Birmingham and Derby line is not on the same level with
the line which goes to Droitwich (eleven miles from Witley Court), and
there is a little delay in posting a carriage, or in passing from the
lower line of railway to the upper.

Thirdly, there is the passage for Her Majesty, though not through
Birmingham as in an ordinary travelling carriage, yet in the immediate
outskirts of the town, and this twice in the same day.

The Corporation (which is a completely Radical one) might solicit
permission to present an Address to Her Majesty at the station.

There would, I am sure, be nothing but demonstrations of the greatest
loyalty and attachment to Her Majesty, but there would probably be
a great concourse of people, and some delay, if the Address were
received.

Perhaps your Royal Highness will think of these suggestions, which I
am induced to offer by the desire to foresee everything which may have
a bearing upon the personal comfort of the Queen.

I have the honour to be, Sir, with sincere respect, your Royal
Highness's most faithful and humble Servant,

ROBERT PEEL.



[Pageheading: THE DUCHESSE DE NEMOURS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _14th November 1843._

MY DEAREST, KINDEST UNCLE,--A long and most _interesting_ letter
reached me on Sunday, dated 9th and 10th, and I beg to return my
warmest thanks for it. The confidence you show me I feel deeply and
gratefully, and you may rely on my discretion. Before I touch upon any
of the subjects in your letter I will give you news of our visitors.
The dear Nemours arrived safely after a good passage on Saturday, well
but very tired. They are now quite recovered, and we are too happy to
have them here. Nemours looks well, and is very kind and amiable, but
I think there is a seriousness since poor Chartres' death which used
not to be formerly, though he always was _reserved_, and that, I
think, he is _not_ now. Dearest Victoire is _amazingly_ improved and
_développée_--really quite wonderfully so. We are all so struck by it,
by her good sense and by her conversation; and with that she has
kept that innocence and gentleness which she always had--and is _so
lovely_, dear sweet child. I must always look at her, and she, dear
child, seems so pleased to see me again. I find her _grown_, but grown
very thin, and she has not those bright colours she used to have. All
that you say of Bordeaux is just what Nemours says, and what Guizot
writes, and what _I_ and also Sir Robert Peel _always_ felt and
thought. Aberdeen, with the greatest wish to do _all_ that is kind and
right, _really thought_ that B. was only come to amuse himself,
and had no idea till _now_ that the feeling in France in _all_ the
different parties was so strong. You will have heard by this time that
we have decided _not_ to receive B. in _any way_ whatever. It is a
pleasure to hear how mildly and sensibly Nemours speaks upon all these
subjects, and indeed every subject....

I think you did _uncommonly right_ in what you answered the poor King
about the _arrêté_ in favour of the _Prussians_, and I am very glad
you _have_ done so. It will have a good effect here.

Louise will tell you how we celebrated good Bertie's birthday. The
children are in great favour with the Nemours.

Pray, dearest Uncle, do not forget to send me the list of Rellstab's
works. We think of making another little tour after the dear Nemours'
departure, to Drayton (Sir Robert Peel's), Chatsworth, and Belvoir.

We are very sorry to lose dear Feo and Ernest. They are so good and
excellent, and she is so _brav_. Ever, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.



[Pageheading: BIRMINGHAM]


[_Memorandum enclosed from Sir Robert Peel to Prince Albert,
      about the political condition of Birmingham, which the
      Prince was intending to visit._]

The Mayor is a hosier--of _extreme_ political opinions--_in fact, a
Chartist_.

The contest for the office of Mayor was between him and a man of
Radical opinions, but Chartism prevailed.

The Mayor has taken a violent part, before his Mayoralty, against
Church Rates, and in reference to the state of Ireland.

The Conservative party took no part whatever in the Municipal
Elections, and would not vote.

They would, if invited or permitted by the Mayor and Town Council,
cordially co-operate with men of opposite opinions in any mark of
respect to the Prince.

No probability of any tumult or of any demonstration but one of
respect personally towards the Prince, if his visit be clearly and
manifestly unconnected with politics.

An immense concourse of people must be expected, not only from
Birmingham, but Wolverhampton, Walsall, and all the neighbouring
towns, and previous police arrangements must be very carefully made.

There may be a proposal of a collation and of an Address, to be
received in the Town Hall.

Should not the Lord Lieutenant (Lord Warwick) have notice?

Is the Mayor to accompany the Prince in the same carriage?[91]

The Mayor has no carriage.

No communication should be made to any party in Birmingham, except to
the municipal authorities, notwithstanding their political bias and
_extreme_ opinions.

The late Mayor, Mr James, though a Radical, would have summoned the
leading men of different parties.

Doubts as to whether the present Mayor would, or whether he would not,
place the whole arrangement in the hands of the party with which he is
connected.

This risk must be incurred, as communications to other parties would
not be advisable.

    [Footnote 91: This was the course adopted.]




[Pageheading: THE DUC DE BORDEAUX]


_The Earl of Aberdeen to Queen Victoria._

FOREIGN OFFICE, _1st December 1843._

Lord Aberdeen presents his humble duty to your Majesty. He has not yet
received any communication from the Duc de Lévis, notwithstanding he
had been led to expect it, from a notice repeatedly conveyed to him to
that effect. It seems probable that in consequence of what the Duc
de Lévis may have heard, as well as from the course pursued by the
friends of the Duc de Bordeaux, Lord Aberdeen may not now see him
at all. Should this be the case, Lord Aberdeen is rather inclined
to regret it; as although he would formerly have seen him with some
reluctance, he would now be glad to have an opportunity of expressing
his sentiments very plainly respecting the proceedings of the Prince
and his adherents in this country.

Lord Aberdeen understands from Sir Robert Peel that your Majesty would
like to be informed of any particulars connected with the Levée lately
held by the Duc de Bordeaux. Lord Aberdeen would willingly communicate
these particulars, but in reality there is very little to be added
to the official accounts contained in the _Morning Post_, which it
is obvious are inserted by authority. He saw M. de Ste Aulaire this
morning, who was a good deal excited by what has taken place, and has
written very fully to Paris; but he knew nothing more than he had seen
in the newspapers.

It may perhaps be worth mentioning to your Majesty that at the
presentation of the Address by M. Chateaubriand[92] on Friday, the
cries of "Vive le Roi!" and "Vive Henri V.!" were so loud as to be
distinctly audible in the Square. Lord Aberdeen understands that this
enthusiasm has been the cause of serious differences amongst many of
those who had come to pay their respects to the Duc de Bordeaux, a
large portion of whom are by no means disposed to recognise him as
King during the life of the Duc d'Angoulême.[93]

Lord Aberdeen cannot learn that any other member of the Diplomatic
Body has been presented to the Duc de Bordeaux, and does not believe
that any such presentation has taken place. Indeed, there appears to
be a general disinclination that such should be the case; although
some of them feel considerable difficulty in consequence of the
relationship existing between their Sovereigns and the Prince.

    [Footnote 92: François, Vicomte de Chateaubriand (1768-1848),
    a great supporter of the Bourbons, and made a Peer in 1815. He
    was Ambassador in London in 1822.]

    [Footnote 93: Eldest son of Charles X.]




_Queen Victoria to Lord Stanley._

CHATSWORTH, _3rd December 1843._

The Queen approves of Lord Stanley's proposed Draft to Sir Charles
Metcalfe.[94] This question can in no way be settled without giving
offence to one part of the country; the Queen, however, hopes that
the fixing upon Montreal as the seat of Government will hereafter be
considered as fair by impartial minds. Sir Charles continues to show
great discretion and firmness in his most arduous and unsatisfactory
situation, and deserves much praise and encouragement.

    [Footnote 94: Governor-General of Canada.]




[Pageheading: VISIT TO CHATSWORTH]



_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

BELVOIR CASTLE, _4th December 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Being much hurried, I can only write you a few
lines to thank you for your kind letter of the 29th, received this
morning. You will have heard from Louise the account of our stay
at Drayton (which is a very nice house), and of Albert's brilliant
reception at Birmingham. We arrived at Chatsworth on Friday, and left
it at nine this morning, quite charmed and delighted with everything
there. Splendour and comfort are so admirably combined, and the Duke
does everything so well. I found many improvements since I was there
eleven years ago. The conservatory is out and out the finest thing
imaginable of its kind. It is one mass of glass, 64 feet high, 300
long, and 134 wide.[95] The grounds, with all the woods and cascades
and fountains, are so beautiful too. The first evening there was a
ball, and the next the cascades and fountains were illuminated, which
had a beautiful effect. There was a large party there, including
many of the Duke's family, the Bedfords, Buccleuchs, the Duke of
Wellington, the Normanbys, Lord Melbourne (who is much better),
and the Beauvales. We arrived here at half-past two, we perform our
journey so delightfully on the railroad, so quickly and easily. It
puts me in mind of our dear stay in Belgium, when we stop at the
various stations.

Albert is going out hunting to-morrow, which I wish was _over_, but I
am assured that the country is much better than the Windsor country.

The Duc de Bordeaux's proceedings in London are most highly improper.

The Queen Dowager is also here.

We leave this place on Thursday for home, which, I own, I shall be
glad of at last. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 95: It was built by Mr Joseph Paxton, then
    Superintendent of the Gardens, whose intelligence had
    attracted the Duke of Devonshire's attention. In 1850 he was
    the successful competitor for the Great Exhibition building,
    and was knighted on its completion. He superintended its
    re-erection at Sydenham, and afterwards became M.P. for
    Coventry.]




_The Princess Hohenhohe to Queen Victoria._

LANGENBURG, _10th December 1843._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--... You ask in your letter about the manner in
which my children say their prayers? They say it when in their beds,
but not kneeling; how absurd to find _that_ necessary, as if it could
have anything to do with making our prayers more acceptable to the
Almighty or more holy. How really clever people can have those notions
I don't understand. I am sorry it is the case there, where there is
so much good and, I am certain, real piety. Dear Pussy learning her
letters I should like to see and hear; I am sure she will learn them
very quick. Has Bertie not learned some more words and sentences
during your absence?...

Your attached and devoted sister,

FEODORA.




[Pageheading: PRINCE ALBERT WITH THE HOUNDS]


_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _12th December 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I thank you much for your kind letter of the 7th,
which I received as usual on Sunday. Louise will be able to tell
you _how_ well the remainder of our journey went off, and how well
Albert's hunting answered.[96] One can hardly credit the absurdity of
people here, but Albert's riding so boldly and hard has made such a
sensation that it has been written all over the country, and they make
much more of it than if he had done some great act!

It rather disgusts one, but still it had done, and does, good, for
it has put an end to all impertinent sneering for the future about
Albert's riding. This journey has done great good, and my beloved
Angel in particular has had _the greatest success_; for instance, at
Birmingham the good his visit has done has been immense, for Albert
spoke to all these manufacturers _in their own language_, which they
did not expect, and these poor people have only been accustomed to
hear demagogues and Chartists.

We cannot understand how you can think the country about Chatsworth
_not_ pretty, for it is (with the exception of the moors) beautiful,
wooded hills and valleys and rapid streams. The country round Belvoir
I do not admire, but the view from the castle is very fine and
extensive, and Albert says puts him so in mind of the Kalenberg....

Pray have you heard anything about Aumale's plans? Dear little Gaston
seems much better.

The Duc de Bordeaux has been informed of my and the Government's
extreme displeasure at their conduct; they say there shall be no more
such displays. He was to leave London yesterday, only to return again
for a day, and then to leave England altogether.

With Albert's love, ever, dearest Uncle, your most devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 96: The Prince hunted with the Belvoir hounds on the
    5th.]




[Pageheading: AN AMERICAN VIEW OF MONARCHY]


_The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria._

LAEKEN, _15th December 1843._

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--I am most happy to see that your journey passed
so well, and trust you are not sorry to be again in your very dear
and comfortable home, and with your dear children. People are
very strange, and their great delight is to find fault with their
fellow-creatures; what harm could it have done them if Albert had
_not_ hunted at all? and still I have no doubt that his having hunted
well and boldly has given more satisfaction than if he had done Heaven
knows what praiseworthy deed; _ainsi est et sera le monde_.

I am glad also that the Birmingham course succeeded so well; the theme
had been for some years, particularly amongst manufacturers, that
Royalty was useless and ignorant, and that the greatest blessing would
be, to manufacture beyond measure, and to have an American form of
Government, with an elective head of State.

Fortunately, there has always hitherto been in England a very
aristocratic feeling freely accepted by the people, who like it, and
show that they like it.... I was much amused, some time ago, by a
very rich and influential American from New York assuring me that they
stood in great need of a Government which was able to grant protection
to property, and that the feeling of many was for Monarchy instead
of the misrule of mobs, as they had it, and that he wished very much
_some branch of the Coburg family might be disposable_ for such a
place. _Qu'en dites-vous_, is not this flattering?...

There is nothing very remarkable going on, besides I mean to write
again on some subjects. Give my best love to Albert, and Pussy, who
may remember me perhaps, and I remain, ever, my beloved Victoria, your
devoted Uncle,

LEOPOLD R.




_Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _19th December 1843._

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Your kind and dear letter of the 15th, written
in your true wit and humour, reached me on Sunday and gave me great
pleasure. We have had also most wonderfully mild weather, but _I_
think very disagreeable and unseasonable; it always makes me so
bilious. The young folks are very flourishing and prosperous--Pussette
knowing all her letters, and even beginning to read a little. When I
mentioned your birthday to her, she said, "I cried when I saw Uncle
Leopold," which _was_ the case, I am sorry to say, the first time she
saw you this year....

I don't believe that the _white_ flag on the house at Belgrave
Square[97] is true. Lord Melbourne and the Beauvales were here for
three nights; and it was a pleasure to see Lord Melbourne so much
himself again; the first evening he was a good deal excited and talked
and laughed as of old; the two other evenings he was in the quite
silent mood which he often used to be in formerly, and really _quite_
himself, and there was hardly any strangeness at all. Lady Beauvale is
really a _very, very_, charming person, and so attentive and kind to
both her husband and Lord Melbourne. Our little chapel here (which is
extremely pretty) is to be consecrated this morning, and Lady Douro
comes into Waiting for the first time. To-morrow Mamma gives us a
dinner. Poor Lord Lynedoch[98] is, I fear, dying, and Lord Grey is so
bad he cannot last long.[99]

Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 97: The house occupied by the Duc de Bordeaux.]

    [Footnote 98: Thomas, Lord Lynedoch, had died the previous
    day, aged ninety-five. He highly distinguished himself in
    the Peninsula and in Holland, and received the thanks of
    Parliament, and a Peerage in 1814.]

    [Footnote 99: He died in July 1845.]




[Pageheading: THE SPANISH MARRIAGE]


_Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen._

WINDSOR CASTLE, _28th December 1843._

The Queen has been much amused to see by Sir Robert Gordon's despatch
of the 15th, the extreme fright of Prince Metternich at the proposed
marriage of Queen Isabel with Count Trapani,[100] but she regrets
that Sir Robert tried to make excuses for the conduct we have pursued,
which the Queen thinks requires no apology.

    [Footnote 100: See _ante_, p. 487, note 54. (this Ch., above)]

